                                       Parent
                                      Handbook




                                                 1
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                              Parent Handbook Components

       Model of Care                                                        Page   3
       Culture Statement                                                    Page   4
       Positive Youth Environment                                           Page   5
       Youth Rights and Responsibilities                                    Page   6
       Basic Expectations                                                   Page   8
       Phone Calls, Mail, Etc…                                              Page   10
       Visitation Guidelines                                                Page   12
       Home Visit Criteria                                                  Page   13
       Home Visit Criteria Out of State                                     Page   14
       Contract Rules for Home Visit                                        Page   15
       Client Personals Allowed at Intake / Gifts from Home                 Page   17
       Phase System                                                         Page   18
       Point System                                                         Page   20
       Grievance Procedure and Form                                         Page   22
       Family Concern Procedure and Form                                    Page   24
       Intake Clothing List                                                 Page   29
       Contact Information                                                  Page   30




                                                                                           2
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                         Model of Care

       KidsPeace Mesabi Academy strives to give Hope, Help and Healing to youth facing crisis. We
       provide specialized services for delinquent male youth ages 10-18, EFF, and youth on CHPS
       petition. These core beliefs are key to KidsPeace Mesabi Academy Programs:

       Mission:
        To give hope, help and healing to children, families and communities

       Vision:
        To help people in need overcome challenges and transform their lives by providing
          emotional and physical healthcare and educational services in an atmosphere of teamwork,
          compassion and creativity

       Values:
        What we value … Integrity, Human Well Being, Quality, Community, Respect and
          Excellence

       Dignity:
        Every youth is unique, has worth and value

       Safety:
        Safety is a primary need and fundamental right of every youth
        America’s future depends upon emotionally healthy and physically safe youth
        Every American, especially teachers, Youth Care Workers (YCW) and youth group leaders
          share a unique responsibility to positively nurture, respect, and safeguard youth

       Relationships and Belonging:
        Youth grow in the context of supportive relationships
        Youth are helped most by people closest to them
        Families are the single most powerful support system for youth

       Empowerment:
        Every youth has powerful potential
        Help for every youth facing crisis must be available anytime, anywhere

       Character:
        Youth learn by making decisions and taking action based upon values
        Helping youth anticipate and overcome crisis is a moral imperative and wise investment of
         resources

       Transformation:
        Youths discover strengths through choice, risk, failure, insight, and success
        Every American has a moral obligation to protect and support youth




                                                                                                         3
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                    Culture Statement


       KidsPeace Corporation is dedicated to helping kids. Our staff members need to actively role
       model and communicate organizational values. The leadership of KidsPeace had defined
       workplace values that characterize who we are as an organization. In order to develop a healing
       and productive environment, our staff members dedicate themselves to the following workplace
       values at all times:

       Safety and Boundaries:
        Each staff person practices an unwavering commitment to professional interactions and
          safety with all kids, staff members and customers

       Accountability:
        Each staff person maintains personal responsibility for his/her behavior and performance

       Ethical Behavior:
        Each staff person maintains the highest level of honesty and integrity in his/her work and
          personal interactions

       Dependability:
        Each staff person fulfills his/her job responsibilities and follows through on all commitments
          with the highest degree of quality

       Teamwork:
        Each staff person demonstrates a cooperative spirit by supporting his/her colleagues

       Communication:
        Each staff person is responsible for timely sharing of pertinent job information

       Compassion:
        Each staff person embraces a youth-centered approach committed to maintaining the dignity
         and safety of the kids in our care




                                                                                                          4
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                Positive Youth Environment

       KidsPeace Mesabi Academy developed Positive Youth Environment (PYE). PYE means helping
       each other grow by treating each other with respect and dignity, helping each other solves
       problems, encouraging and supporting others through difficult times, finding times for humor
       and playfulness, learning and using responsible behaviors, and promoting an overall sense of
       safety and acceptance. There are eight components of PYE.

       Admission/Orientation Process:
        This element is designed to help the resident feel comfortable and welcome at KidsPeace Mesabi
           Academy
        It should provide the resident information about the program and assist the resident in understanding
           the program goals and procedures
       Peer Mentor Program:
        To encourage residents to help one another with treatment focus areas and times when a resident
           would benefit from peer support and advice
       House of Representatives:
        To provide residents the opportunity to be involved in many aspects of the program
        It should offer a forum to discuss concerns and ideas at improving the residents’ living environment
        It is intended to empower the residents to have appositive influence on each other and the program
           itself
       PYE Therapeutic Group:
        The PYE Therapeutic Group is an opportunity for all residents within a program to gather and discuss
           issues that arise regarding how the environment is functioning
        The responsibility of staff members is to promote an environment, which is positive and therapeutic.
           This group is a forum for doing that.
        This group also will empower the residents to make a positive impact on their environment. The
           group collectively should work on issues as they arise and also create innovative programming
           changes, which will maintain a positive environment.
       PYE Team Building Activities:
        To demonstrate the value and benefits of cooperation
        To provide opportunities to develop new skills
        To present opportunities for both individual and group success
        To experience encouragement, investment, relationship building and trust
       Kids Give Back – Community Service:
        This is a community service project to assist other agencies and organizations
        This element will benefit our residents by working within the philosophies of the model of care. It
           will contribute to the residents’ personal growth; developing dignity, self respect, community
           awareness, and pride.
       PYE Progress Group:
        To give residents a forum for receiving constructive feedback from their peers regarding their
           progress on treatment issues
       Discharge Program:
        This element is divided into two parts. The first part involves assisting with discharge planning. The
           second part is a one-time discharge activity.
        The discharge planning gives the resident an opportunity to meet with a discharge coordinator
           (specific to programs). This is to assist in establishing and developing discharge plans and strategies
           that are specific to that child’s needs.
        This element also offers the resident and his peer group a way to say “goodbye” during a discharge
           activity



                                                                                                                     5
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                             Rights & Responsibilities

       Rights:
        You have the right to considerate, impartial, respectful care and to expect reasonable
          continuity of this care
        You have the right to be addressed by name in a dignified manner
        You have the right to give informed, written consent prior to the start of any medical, dental
          or psychiatric treatment, or if you are a minor, to have your legal guardian give informed
          written consent. Informed consent is based on an explanation of the treatment procedures to
          be provided, any known risks associated with the procedures, and alternative treatments
          available. Treatment may be provided without informed consent in life threatening situations
          and instances when required by law.
        You have the right to be informed of the names, and functions of staff that are providing
          direct service to you
        You have the right to be informed of the rules, procedures, and schedules concerning the
          operation of KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
        You have the right to expect that all communication and records pertaining to your care will
          be treated according to the laws governing confidentiality
        You have the right to participate in the development of your individual program plan
        You have the right to voice grievances and make recommendations and/or suggestions with
          regard to your individual program plan, without any fear of reprisal, and to be advised of the
          result of the consideration of your grievance within a reasonable amount of time
        You have the right not to be subjected to corporal punishment, harassment, intimidation,
          harm, humiliation, or interference with normal bodily functions by other youths or staff
        You have the right not to be discriminated against based on race, creed, religion, national
          origin, sex or disability. This includes having the same access to all services and programs
        You have the right to participate in religious services and religious counseling on a voluntary
          basis, subject only to the limitations necessary to maintain KidsPeace Mesabi Academy order
          and security. This includes having access to clergy, spiritual advisors, publications, and
          related services that allow you to adhere to your religious practices.
        You have the right to nutritious meals, proper bedding, clean clothing, toilet facilities, daily
          showers, adequate lighting, proper ventilation, and an overall safe environment that is
          maintained in compliance with state and local fire and safety laws and regulations
        You have the right to appropriate medical and dental treatment
        You have the right to visits with family
        You have the right to send and receive correspondence
        You have the right to call, write and meet with your legal representative while at KidsPeace
          Mesabi Academy
        You have the right to indoor and outdoor recreation equipment and opportunities
        You have the right to report any problems or complaints that you may have while at
          KidsPeace Mesabi Academy without any fear of reprisal
        You have the right to appeal any disciplinary action taken against you as a result of a rule
          violation. In addition you have a right to a response to your appeal in accordance with the
          appeal procedure.




                                                                                                            6
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
       Responsibilities:
        You have the responsibility to treat all others in a respectful and dignified manner
        You have the responsibility to exercise your rights in a mature and appropriate manner
        You have the responsibility to help develop your goals and objectives or your individual
          treatment plan
        You have the responsibility to participate actively in individual program plan
        You have the responsibility to maintain confidentiality regarding services to other youth
        You have the responsibility to respect the rights of others in KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
          regardless of sex, race, religion, creed, national origin or disability
        You have the responsibility to inform staff members regarding situations that jeopardize
          safety and security or life threatening situations that you may become aware of during the
          course of your stay
        You have the responsibility to communicate openly and honestly with others at KidsPeace
          Mesabi Academy
        You have the responsibility to learn and follow the rules, regulations, expectations, and
          schedules and staff directives while at KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
        You have the responsibility to respect the property of others while at KidsPeace Mesabi
          Academy
        You have the responsibility to contribute of yourself to the larger external community
        You have the responsibility not to subject any other person to mistreatment including, but not
          limited to, corporal punishment, harassment, intimidation, harm, humiliation or interference
          with normal bodily functions
        You have the responsibility not to discriminate against any other persons or staff members or
          use language or behavior that would imply prejudice or discrimination
        You have the responsibility not to abuse any of the religious opportunities and provisions that
          you are afforded
        You have the responsibility to clean and maintain you living quarters and unit
        You have the responsibility to ask for medical and dental care when necessary
        You have the responsibility to conduct yourself properly during visits and refraining from
          passing or sending contraband through visitation or through the mail
        You have the responsibility of abiding by the guidelines set down by KidsPeace Mesabi
          Academy and your attorney for the opportunity to call, write, and meet with legal
          representation while at KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
        You have the responsibility to maintain your clothes in a clean and odor free condition
        You have the responsibility to respect and not abuse the equipment used for indoor and
          outdoor recreational purposes
        You have the responsibility to abide by KidsPeace Mesabi Academy practices concerning
          housekeeping maintenance and personal hygiene
        You have the responsibility to report any incidences that may occur and to follow KidsPeace
          Mesabi Academy grievance procedures when making complaints
        You have the responsibility to report if any improper action is taken against you as a result of
          a properly filed grievance
        You have the responsibility to initiate any appeal and follow the proper procedures in the
          course of your efforts




                                                                                                            7
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                      Basic Expectations

          Youth will be respectful and polite to staff and other youth at all times
          Youth will not swear or curse
          Youth will not damage, abuse or misuse any property of KidsPeace Mesabi Academy, other
           youths’ property or staff’s property
          Youth will not have any physical contact with each other or staff. Physical contact includes:
           horseplay, wrestling, fighting etc.
          Youth must ask to step up to the staff desk and wait for permission to do so. Youth must
           never touch anything on staff desk or read anything on staffs’ desk.
          Youth must ask to cross both blue lines in front of the staff desk
          Youth will never step into staff area located behind staff desk
          Youth must ask to step in and step out of their assigned rooms, bathroom and shower
          While being transported:
           o Youth will not touch anyone or anything
           o Youth will not move ahead of staff
           o Youth will give their number in line out loud as you pass through the doorways
           o Youth will not talk other than stating their number
           o Youth will move in a straight line and facing forward
           o Youth will have skirts tucked in and appropriate footwear
          All youth are responsible for keeping their assigned unit, room, and individual chore clean.
          All youth are responsible for keeping their assigned unit’s designated areas clean
          Youth must attend all groups, recreation opportunities and trans meetings at all times.
           Refusal to attend or removal will result in consequences.
          Youth will follow the unit schedule as determined by staff
          Youth must raise their hands and wait to be called on to speak in group and trans meetings
          No inappropriate references allowed: gang talk, run plans, war stories, sexually explicit talk,
           swearing, threats or intimidations etc.
          Youth will not use slang terms or nicknames
          Youth will not possess contraband. Contraband includes, but in not limited to: material
           pertaining to gangs, materials deemed sexually inappropriate, controlled substances, weapon
           making materials, pens/pencils not assigned or possessed after lights out, sharp objects, glass,
           rubber gloves, tapes/CD’s, pictures/drawings, writings, writings pertaining to
           drugs/alcohol/sex/gangs, and gum etc.
          Items confiscated, as contraband will not be returned to youth. Only the Unit Supervisor
           may make exception.
          Youth will wear KidsPeace Mesabi Academy issued clothing shirts, pants, and shorts. Youth
           may wear personal shoes. All clothing must be kept in good condition and purposeful
           destruction will result in consequences.
          Youth will be allowed to have one pair of tennis shoes on the unit at a time
          Youth will wear underwear and footwear at all times
          Youth will not wear jewelry
          Youth will not trade any personal or issued items
          Youth will not trade or give away snacks or food
          Youth will not have money on the unit at any time
          Youth will not bet with any item or service
          Youth will not enter any bedroom not assigned to them
          Youth will not hang towels, blankets, etc. over windows
                                                                                                              8
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
          Youth will not hang anything that may block staff view of youth
          Youth will not hang anything on the walls. Youth may only hang items on bedroom bulletin
           boards
          Youth are responsible for washing clothing and bedding on assigned days
          Youth will keep room, desk and dresser clean to unit standards at all times
          Youth will have clean laundry folded and placed in dresser drawers at all times. Youth will
           keep dirty clothing in issued laundry bag.
          Youth will keep beds made to unit standards at all times
          Youth will not lean on walls, filing cabinets, etc.
          Youth will never touch windows, window panels, etc. without staff permission
          Youth will not have the unit radio I their personal rooms
          No food or drink allowed in rooms at any time (staff discretion)
          Youth will not open unit cupboards
          Youth will not have any contact with youth serving room time
          Youth will not place feet on furniture
          Youth will possess only assigned pens/pencils signed out from staff. Youth will not possess
           pens/pencils after lights out.
          Youth will not possess personal magazines. Youth may only possess books with approval
           from Unit Supervisor
          Youth may only possess personal hygiene products issued by KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
          Youth will accept nothing from visitors
          Youth will follow all expectations regarding: mail, visitors, phone calls, etc.
          Youth will not touch TV/VCR play station, and radio without staff permission
          Sanctions assigned during non-school hours will be served during non-school hours
          Youth will keep all shoes and flops neatly in the unit designated area
          Youth will not tattoo, pierce, cut on/erase skin, or otherwise injure themselves or others
          Youth who are Phase 3 and 4 are allowed to wear their personal hats on outings
          The administration has the right to modify any rule or any consequence of any infraction for
           any student




                                                                                                          9
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                          Phone Calls, Mail Guidelines

       Phone Calls:
       Youth on orientation, Phase 1 and Phase 2 will be permitted three (10 minute) personal phone
       calls (family members, mentor, etc.) weekly. Youth on Phase 3 will be permitted four (10
       minute) personal calls (family members, mentor, etc.) weekly. Phase 4 will be permitted four
       (15 minute) personal calls (family members, mentor, etc.) weekly. Youth will be permitted
       phone calls to placing agents or legal counsel when it does not interfere with programming.
       Staff to ensure that the party on the phone is on the youth’s approved contact list will screen all
       phone calls. Approved contact list are developed by the Counselor/CM and approved by the
       youth’s placing agent. Any misuse of the phone (communication with unauthorized parties,
       communication that endangers KidsPeace Mesabi Academy safety and security, etc.) may result
       in limitations regarding that youth’s use of the phone.

       Mail:
       Youth are permitted to correspond in writing with friends and family members. Placing agents
       may place restriction on written correspondence but must attain a court order. Mail from another
       treatment/correctional facility will be accepted and given to the youth.
            Privileged Mail – refers to mail marked as privileged mail and sent to the following
              parties: judges, legal representatives, all entities of the State and Local government.
            Non-Privileged Mail – any mail not listed above.

       A. Outgoing Mail
           Privileged mail which is clearly marked as such and addressed to the privileged party will
            be unopened and uncensored
           Non-privileged mail may be opened and inspected for contraband
           Youth may send three letters weekly at KidsPeace Mesabi Academy’s expense
           All mail will be scanned by staff and sealed in front of staff

       B. Incoming Mail
           Privileged mail will not be read but may be opened in front of staff to inspect for
             contraband and to assure the identity of the sender
           Non-privileged mail will be opened and inspected for contraband in the presence of the
             youth
           Staff will remove postage stamps
           Any money received will be accounted for by staff and placed in the youth’s account

       On-grounds Visitation:
       Youth will be permitted to visit with approved parties in accordance with KidsPeace Mesabi
       Academy rules (see attached guidelines). These visits will take place three days weekly, (Wed.
       6:00 – 8:00pm, Sat. & Sun. 2:00 – 5:00pm). Notification must be given to the Counselor/CM
       that a visit will take place. Youth will not be allowed to accept any items(s) from visitors unless
       approved by their Unit Supervisors.

       Clothing:
       Youth will be issued the following clothing upon intake: socks, underwear, pants, shorts, t-
       shirts, sweatshirts and swimming trunks. Youth may wear personal shoes if they have them.
       Clothing is inventoried on a regular basis and youth are able, at that time, to exchange worn

                                                                                                             10
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
       clothing for new clothing. Youth will be allowed to wear personal clothing on day passes and
       home visits with family.
       Youth are not permitted any jewelry with the possible exception for religious objects if they are
       deemed to not be a risk safety and security of KidsPeace Mesabi Academy.

       Laundry Facilities:
       Youth are responsible for washing own laundry. Youth have a washer, two dryers and laundry
       soap available to them no less than two days weekly. One day a week youth are scheduled to
       wash linens.

       Personal Belongings:
       Youth’s personal belongings will be inventoried upon the youth’s intake. At that time, the
       belongings will be placed into storage or boxed for shipment to family. Limited personal items
       are allowed on the unit. The unit Supervisor must approve these items.

       Personal Hygiene:
       Youth will be issued all necessary personal hygiene supplies, including: combs/picks, toothpaste,
       toothbrush, deodorant, soap, shampoo, grease, towels, washcloths, etc. No youth will possess
       hygiene products not provided by KidsPeace Mesabi Academy. Youth with special needs will
       receive a nursing order to obtain specific hygiene items. These will be provided by KidsPeace
       Mesabi Academy. Youth will have access to haircuts once monthly. Youth will be provided
       shaving supplies by KidsPeace Mesabi Academy. Youth will be permitted to shave under close
       supervision by staff in order to ensure safety youth and staff. Youth will have access to shower
       facilities no less than once daily, including after strenuous exercise.

       Room expectations:
       Youth are expected to have their rooms neat and clean at all times. Beds are to be tightly made
       unless youth are sleeping in them. Dirty laundry is to be kept in issued laundry bags. Clean
       laundry and personal hygiene items are to be kept in dresser drawers. Youth are allowed only
       the allotted amount of clothing. Personal papers, notebooks, etc. are to be stored neatly on desk
       or dresser tops. Staff will determine the amount allowable.

       Youth are not to possess contraband. Youth in possession of contraband will be consequenced
       accordingly. Confiscated contraband will be disposed of and not returned to the youth.
       Contraband includes, but is not limited to: any object deemed to be a “sharp” or weapon,
       pictures or writings or a sexual nature, pictures or writings of a gang oriented nature, writings
       relating to safety and security issues for KidsPeace Mesabi Academy, drugs and/or
       paraphernalia, alcohol etc….

       Code Red Procedure:
       Staff will call a “Code Red” for two purposes: a crisis situation is developing or taking place and
       for unit medication pass. If on the unit when staff calls “Code Red”, youth are to get to their
       assigned rooms as quickly as possible. They are not required to ask to “cross” or “step in”
       during a Code Red. Youth are not to be standing in their doorways and are to remain quiet until
       staff calls an “All Clear”. If in another area of the facility, youth will be instructed as to what the
       expectations are for that area.




                                                                                                                 11
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                         Visitors for Client – Admittance Guidelines

       The following rules apply to all visitors:
        Visiting hours with client:
          o Wed. 6:00 - 8:00 pm
          o Sat. 2:00 - 5:00 pm
          o Sun. 2:00 - 5:00 pm
        All visitors must be pre-approved by clients guardian
        All visitors must set up visits in advance with clients Counselor/CM
        If a visitor is a felon, the Counselor/CM must get approval from the Executive Director
          o Felon must be related to the client before Executive Director will review the case
          o If felon is not related to client, visit will be denied
        Once visitors have arrived, the Superior of the building will confirm visitor calendar and
          authorize visit based on Counselor/CM approval
        Visitors will be identified on visiting list approved by Executive Director of designee
        Visitors will register upon entry into Mesabi Academy and provide proof of identification, 16
          and older
          o Visitors who have no ID, will be denied the visit
        Visitors will document relationship to client in “sign in” log
        Visitors must wear a visitors tag
        Visitors will be with an escort of Mesabi Academy Associate at all times
        All visitors will undergo a metal detector search
        Special visits can be arranged upon prior approval of the Executive Director of designee
        Visitors handbags, briefcases, wallets, coin, pocket knives and other personal belongings will
          be left in lockers provided or returned to personal vehicles
        No contraband/personal items are allowed in the facility or on the grounds
        No items may be brought for the client at visitation (no food, pop, games, clothes, etc.)
        Client visitors will never be allowed to bring in “sharps”
        A parent or guardian must accompany visitors under the age of eighteen
        Any visitor suspected of being under the influence of drugs or alcohol will not be allowed to
          visit
        Only three visitors for each client will be allowed at one time, including siblings
        Any denial of visit will be noted in writing and a copy will be given to the client and the
          person denied
        Upon leaving, all visitors will sign out and turn in their visitors tag
        Mesabi Academy Associates will escort all visitors to the door
        Executive director or designee could authorize any alteration of this guideline
        The Executive director or designee may terminate any visit based on safety and or security




                                                                                                          12
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                 Home Visit Criteria

       The following is the criteria for home visits:
        Youth must be on Phase 3
        Participation with a positive attitude in all aspects of the program prior to the home visit
        Youth will read and sign a “Contract Rules for Home Visit”
        Parent and/or Guardian must sign “Contract Rules for Home Visit” and mail/fax contract
          back before youth goes home
        Youth must have an itinerary set before they go home, for approval by the agent and
          Counselor/CM
        Youth must wear Mesabi Academy issued clothing when leaving on home visit
        Youth must wear Mesabi Academy issued clothing upon returning from home visit and
          nothing will be allowed to return with client back to Mesabi Academy
        The unit Supervisor, Counselor/CM, Placement Agent(s) and the parent/guardian must
          approval all visits. All parties must give approval for the visit to occur.
        Any arrests or other infractions of KidsPeace Mesabi Academy’s home visit policy will
          result in appropriate consequences upon return to the Academy with consequences to follow
        Staff will be calling youth randomly during the visit
        Youth will use home visits for family interaction and integration
        Youth will identify goals for himself and the family to work with the Counselor/CM or
          designee
        Youth will document progress on family goals upon returning to the Academy
        Youth must be supervised by parent/guardian at all times
        Youth will be randomly drug tested following home visits
        Youth are required to call in at specific times identified in contract
        KidsPeace Mesabi Academy will provide transportation for home visits for all eligible youth
          the second full weekend of every month (if you are unsure of which weekend this is, please
          contact the Counselor/CM for the schedule)
        Phase 3 youth qualify for one visit a month while on phase 3, which transportation is
          provided for (on the second full weekend of each month)
        Phase 4 youth qualify for two visits a month; however, KidsPeace Mesabi Academy is only
          able to provide transportation once a month (on the second full weekend of each month). If a
          youth requests a second home visit for each month, he is responsible to find transportation
          (which the Counselor/CM can assist in arranging).
        To accommodate the schedules of those assisting in transportation for these extra visits, the
          additional visits may be scheduled for any weekend during the month. ALL visits need to be
          arranged at least 10 days prior to the visit with the Counselor/CM in order to schedule
          medications and make other accommodations.




                                                                                                         13
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                               Home Visit Criteria for Out of State

       The following is the criteria for out of state home visits:
        Youth must be on Phase 4 and one month prior to discharge, youth will be allowed one home
          visit
        Participation with a positive attitude in all aspects of the program prior to the home visit
        Youth will read and sign a “Contract Rules for Home Visit”
        Parent and/or Guardian must sign ”Contract Rules for Home Visit” and mail/fax contract
          back before youth goes home
        Youth must have an itinerary set before they go home, for approval by the agent and
          Counselor/CM
        The unit Supervisor, Counselor/CM, Placement Agent(s) and the parent/guardian must
          approve all visits. All parties must give approval for the visit to occur.
        Any arrests or other infractions of KidsPeace Mesabi Academy’s home visit policy will
          result in appropriate consequences upon return to the Academy with consequences to follow
        Staff will be calling youth randomly during the visit
        Youth will use home visits for family interaction and integration
        Youth will identify goals for himself and the family to work with the Counselor/CM or
          designee
        Youth will document progress on family goals upon returning to the Academy
        Youth must be supervised by parent/guardian at all times
        Youth will be randomly drug tested following home visits
        Youth are required to call in at specific times identifies in the contract
        KidsPeace Mesabi Academy will provide transportation for home visits for all eligible youth
        ALL visits need to be arranged at least 21 days prior to the visit with the Counselor/CM in
          order to schedule transportation requests, schedule medications and make other
          accommodations




                                                                                                        14
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                         Contract Ruled for Home Visit

       I, ______________________________, do agree to adhere to all of the following expectations
       and requirements set forth by KidsPeace Mesabi Academy.

       I understand that even though I am at my home I still fall under the supervision of Mesabi
       Academy, Probation Officer, and Social Worker. If at any time I violate any expectations set
       forth for a home visit, I understand that my visit can be terminated immediately and I will be
       held accountable.

       While on my visit and the transport there and back, I agree to the following:

          I will remain under direct supervision of parent or guardian at all times and follows all
           expectations of parents or guardian
          I agree to follow all expectations that I am expected to follow while at KidsPeace Mesabi
           Academy (ex: no R-rated movies, no pornography, etc.)
          I will act respectful and appropriate to everyone I associate with
          I will refrain from all tobacco, alcohol and drugs
          I will refrain from all illegal activity
          I will follow all expectations during the transportation to the home visit or he will be brought
           back to KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
          I will call Three Times: (1-888-270-5013 or 218-258-2274)
           o 1st call between 9:00am and 11:00am
           o 2nd call between 3:00pm and 5:00pm
           o 3rd call between 7:00pm and 9:00pm
          I will bring all receipts back for the money taken out of my account
          I will not take personal items back to Mesabi Academy.
          I will take my required medications at the appropriate times
          Those residents transported to their home visit by automobile will be at their home for pick-
           up on the designated date. Those residents transported to their home visit by airplane, also
           need to be at their home when the assigned driver is scheduled to be there and must make
           their return flight to the Academy. If residents are not at the designated pick-up areas or do
           not make their flights, they may be considered on AWOL status and/or consequences may be
           given.

       Note: KidsPeace Mesabi Academy staff will make random calls to the resident’s home in order
       to ensure that he is under direct supervision of a parent or guardian at all times.

       I understand that if my social worker or probation officer arranges any type of schedule to follow
       for my visit with my family or guardian, I must ensure it is followed. If I must waiver from the
       schedule, the persons who arrange it must approve.

       I have progressed this far in the program to be given the opportunity to be trusted on the home
       visit due to having made the right choices and decisions while at Mesabi Academy. I understand
       that I must follow these expectations to continue to prove to myself that I can succeed and be
       trusted.

       Date youth transported:

                                                                                                              15
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
       Youth will be transported to the following address:




       Date youth picked up:

       Youth needs to be available for pickup on the above date at the following address:




       Client Signature                                                                     Date



       Counselor / Case Manager Signature                                                   Date


                                                                                                   16
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                               Client Personals Allowed at Intake / Gifts from Home

       Intake:
       There is only ONE approved item at intake and it is a pair of client’s personal shoes. Shoes must
       be appropriate, with no gang writing or symbols on shoes.

       Personal Items:
           Shoes: A client will be allowed to enter the facility with shoes on his feet.
                 o Any new shoes sent to a client must be shipped directly from the manufacturer or
                    the store where they were purchased. We will not accept any shoes sent directly
                    from home.
                 o If prior approval is received, new shoes may be sent if mailed by the Probation
                    Officer or Social Worker.
           Shirts: A client on Phase III or IV is allowed to wear his own shirts if they are provided
             by Mesabi Academy.

       Gifts from Home
           Only one item will be allowed from home for Christmas and for a birthday.
           All items must be pre-approved by Unit Supervisor before being shipped.
           All items must be mailed to the Unit Supervisor’s attention for inspection and distribution
               to the client.
           Items received without prior approval will be discarded.
           Approved Items:
                   o Sketch pads
                   o Journals or notebooks
                            No wire binders
                   o Books (appropriate content)
                   o Magazines (appropriate content, no staples)
                   o Photo album with family pictures (C-CM approval of pictures)
                            No wire binders
           Unapproved Items Include but are not Limited to:
                   o No Blankets / Comforters
                   o No Food Items
                   o No Clothing

       ***REMINDER: Unapproved items will be discarded

       Gifts from Mesabi Academy:
           Towels / Wash Cloths / Sweat Pants / Unit Games / Flavored Chap Stick / Sketch Pads /
               Books / Journals




                                                                                                           17
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                                  Phase System

       Phase systems have worked well and are a significant motivator for residents. A lot of you have
       been in treatment before and I bet they had Phases there too. This is just a way for you, to keeep
       track of your treatment progress and a way for us to reward you for a job well done as you move
       form Phase to Phase and, more importantly us. The Phase system at Mesabi Academy is an
       anchor pointed or benchmarked system that takes into account progress on assignments and
       demonstration of change.

       The benchmarks, or behaviors and atitudes that you need to learn and show, will be posted on
       your program. They include treatment progress, progress in your behavior on the program and
       progress in your schoolwork and attitude. Yes, school success is an expected part of your
       progress haere at Mesabi Academy. No one can be successful after treatment without being
       successful in school too.

       You will be expected to demonstrate behaviors that show you are ready for a Phase change for
       28-35days before advancing to the next Phase and will be expected to remain on Phase 4 for 56-
       70 days. Nobody is really expected to achieve each Phase in 35 days; it is all up to your
       behavior. Don’t get too down if you have one bad day, just keep trying and remember we are
       looking at the whole time not just your one bad day (or your one good day). One way that we do
       this is by expecting you to maintain an average of 34 points for the four weeks prior to
       approaching for a Phase change.

       Your Counselor/Case Manager (CM) must provide all petitions and will be the only one what
       can give out the paperwork for your Phase Petitions. When you petition for Phase 4 this will
       occur in person at a team meeting. Each program has their own ceremony and ways of
       recognizing your move from one Phase to the next.

       Everyone starts on Orientation Phase and the move to Phase 1 is automatic and will be two or
       three weeks after you come in.

       Phase One-Anchor Points: (this is what you work on in Phase 1 to move to Phase 2)
        Identifies and takes responsibility for negative behavior both past and present that resulted in
          placement
        Attends all required groups and school
        Takes medications as prescribed
        Does not engage in behavior that harms self or others
        Follows program routine and basic expectations with staff intervention
        Has developed and understands an in-program safety plan
        Develops a realistic awareness of academic achievement
        Follows classroom expectations and responds to redirection positively

       Phase Two-Anchor Points: (this is what you work on in Phase 2 to move to Phase 3)
        Contributes in groups and follows group expectations
        Begins to hold self accountable for negative behaviors
        Demonstrates respect for self, peers and staff
        Follows program and school routine and basic expectations with little or not intervention
        Identifies and uses alternatives to aggression or negative behavior
        Has completed and understands offense cycle
                                                                                                            18
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
          Acknowledges and understand risk factors
          Makes positive choices that increase academic achievement
          Works on assigned tasks throughout the class period

       Phase Three-Anchor Points: (this is what you need to work on in Phase 3 to move to Phase 4)
        Activly participates in treatment and seeks out opportunities to grow
        Holds self and others accountable
        Can complete and use the Relaps Prevention Plan (RPP) for outing and visits
        Understands how his behavior affects others
        Serves as a role model for others
        Strengthens the therapeutic community
        Responds to redirection the first time given
        Completes assignments with a C or better
        Accepts responsibility for staying on task in the classroom throughout the class period

       Phase Four-Anchor Points: (this is what you owk on to shou readiness for the community)
        Honestly processes home visits and outings
        Demonstrates the ability to use an RPP on and off grounds
        Supports peers appropriately and assists peers in treatment and school work
        Actively supports the values of Mesabi Academy and KidsPeace
        Identifies positive and realistic goals for the future
        Appropriately closes out relationships
        Takes personal responsibility for academic achievement
        Completes all assignments in a timelymanner
        Develops a plan for continued academic achievement in the future




                                                                                                     19
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                             Point System

       Overview:
       We realize that points are important to you and they are a good way to judge your progress while
       at Mesabi.
       Everybody is tracked and awarded points each hour during the day and two times during the
       overnight.

       Points are awarded based on three things; Safety, Respect, On Task.
       It is possible to earn up to 48 points in a day
             48-37 represents a positive day
             36-31 is neutral
             30 and below is a negative day

       You will receive feedback right away when you fail to earn a point.

       Everybody is tracked and awarded points each hour during the day and two times during
       the overnight.

       You begin earning daytime points at 7:00am and may earn up to three points each hour, EG 7-8,
       8-9 etc till 9:00pm. You may then earn three points from 9:00pm-2:00am and three from
       2:00am-7:00am. You earn points each hour. You cannot lose your points for next hour in this
       hour. You can only fail your points for the hour you are in. Each hour is a clean slate.

       Points are awarded based on three criteria Safety, Respect, On Task.
       These three things will cover all of the goal behaviors you are working towards, if you are safe,
       respectful and on task you are meeting all of our basic expectations. You may be given
       redirections before points are taken for some behaviors, such as respect but typically the safety
       point is hard to redirect before failing to earn the point.

             Unsafe is defined as any behavior that threatens the safety of the program, staff or peers.
              This will include any of the things we’d give you a safety intervention for, any kind of
              threats, any arguing that requires removal from the program or classroom, posturing or
              gestures, horseplay. These are not the only things, just examples.
             Disrespect will overlap a lot with safety. Basically any behavior or words towards others
              that demean degrade or insult. Name calling that does not escalate to the level of safety
              would be a good example. Disrespect can also take the form of ignoring redirections or
              directives. If you have been asked three times to join group, or pick up his things, or be
              quiet during PYE, and you refuse that becomes disrespectful.
             On Task is maybe the easiest to define. Doing what you are supposed to be doing during
              that hour. Did you refuse to participate in recreation? Then you would fail to earn your
              point for on task.

       Many times the points will overlap but we will try to keep things as “clean” as possible. If you
       are cooperative in going to rec, did not get angry and disrespectful but just said, “no, I don’t want
       to”, you should only lose his point for on task. If you make a stink about going down to rec,
       called someone a name when you were asked to participate and threw the ball at a peer then sat
       in the corner you would fail to earn all three for the hour.


                                                                                                               20
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
       We will try to keep things as black and white as possible. You either were or you weren’t. Do
       not argue or bargain. It takes two people to argue, every time. If you won’t argue there is no one
       to argue with. If you fail to earn all your points this hour, next hour is a clean slate. If you fail to
       earn a point for on task, and you start to argue, you risk failing to earn your point for respect too.

       Point totals will change to 48 possible
           48-37 is positive
           36-31 is neutral
           30 and below is negative day

       It is self explanatory. Work as hard as you can to get into positive territory as soon as you can.
       The average points that you are earning is tied to earning phases. Points will not be the only
       criteria but is a consideration. In general a move to second phase should have a point average of
       31, a move to third phase an average of 37 and fourth phase 43. This is different than the
       positive-neutral-negative. A second phase is up to neutral and third and fourth both maintaining
       a positive average. Privileges will also be tied to points. You must maintain the points for your
       phase to use your privileges. This is calculated weekly. If you are fourth phase and I fall to a 40
       point average for the week you lose your privileges for the following week.

       You will receive feedback immediately when you fail to earn a point.
       Everybody learns best when the feedback regarding the behavior is as close to the behavior as
       possible. When you cross the line and should not earn your point for respect staff should say
       something like “I am sorry Johnny, you will not earn your point for respect this hour”. If you
       need more explanation of why you did not earn the point please ask for a timeout and work it out
       there. Even then do not argue. Staff will help you with ways to cope with the feelings,
       encourage you that it’s just one hour, next hour you can earn all your points, remind you that if
       you failed to earn your point for on task then become unsafe, disrespectful etc that you will not
       earn those points either. They will not argue whether it was respectful or not or why you said or
       did what you did or anything else.




                                                                                                                  21
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                          Cardinal Rules

       These are the non-negotiable, absolutely not tolerated behaviors that everyone agrees on. These
       rules will be posted on your program and you will need to know them and know how important
       they are. The residents that share your program area with you will not tolerate you breaking
       these rules and if you do they will expect you to spend some time in the Secure Program or in the
       Alternative Intervention Room (AIR). When you return to the program they will expect you to
       apologize to them for breaking hr rule and ask to rejoin the program. They do this because they
       want the program to be a safe place to live.

       If a youth tries to be intimidating one time, this is not a cardinal rule, violation. If a youth
       continues to be intimidating, it needs to be discussed at team and if the youth’s intimidating
       behavior is his primary need for treatment, it can be a cardinal rule violation and will b addressed
       in the youth’s Treatment Plan or Behavioral Intervention Plan (BIP).

       Any single act of intimidation can be determined an act of aggression and will be a Cardinal
       Rule violation determined by the Clinical Lead and the Supervisor in Charge.

             No Physical Aggression towards Peers or Staff:
                 o This is the first and most basic rule. Nobody gets to be physically aggressive and
                    remain on the program.
             No Sexual Contact:
                 o You may think, “I would never do this” but you might be surprised and there are
                    guys who get caught up in making this mistake.
             No Absconding:
                 o That’s just a fancy work for running away. There is really nowhere to go and
                    when we catch you you’ll just come back here anyway!!
             No Gang activity:
                 o This means gang signs, gang talk, drawings, writing or anything that even looks
                    like gang stuff. Just leave that behind. No one is in a gang here.
             No Name Calling based on Race, Ethnicity, Religion, Gender or Sexual Orientation:
                 o This means no comments, pictures, drawing, talking, writing or anything even
                    close to being related to racial, ethnic, or gender prejudice. At Mesabi, everyone
                    is equal and we will treat each other with dignity and respect.

       In addition to the Cardinal Rules, there are other behaviors that are unacceptable, i.e. swearing,
       disrespect, not following basic expectations, which may result in you receiving a consequence on
       the unit. For example, you may be given a writing assignment to complete or may be given
       some time to spend in your room. If you feel the consequence is unfair, you do have the right to
       request an impartial review by a supervisor or designee. The findings of this review are final.




                                                                                                              22
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                       Grievance Procedure for Client

       Upon admission, youth shall be informed of their rights to file grievances and appeals against
       any behavior or disciplinary action of staff or other youth. Informal methods of resolving
       disputes are encouraged, but when informal methods of solving disputes are unsuccessful, a
       formal grievance process may be initiated. All grievances shall be handled expeditiously and
       without threat of disciplinary action, or reprisals against anyone using or participating in this
       process.

       It is our belief that the majority of issues with staff are most effectively resolved by talking
       directly to the staff person involved. This is the first step in healthy conflict resolution. Youth
       and families are encouraged to address concerns verbally with the staff involved prior to filing a
       grievance.

       Grievance:
        A circumstance or action considered being unjust and grounds for complaint or resentment

       Informal Resolution (talking to the staff with which you have an issue):
        Staff are trained and encouraged to try to resolve all grievances informally. If an informal
          resolution cannot be reached, the youth should be encouraged to begin the grievance process.
          If the youth needs assistance to complete or deliver the grievance request, a YCW or other
          staff member will be asked to help.

       Grievance Process:
        A youth may select an impartial representative or spokesperson from the staff, or youth
          population for assistance at any time during the grievance process. Turn all grievances into
          the Supervisor in charge or designee. If the grievance is on the Supervisor in charge, turn
          grievance into another Supervisor.

       Civil Action resulting from a Grievance:
        If a youth believes that his civil rights have been violated, and are still in jeopardy, he shall
          not be prevented or restrained from filing a lawsuit
        The findings and decision of the Executive Director or designee will be final




                                                                                                             23
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                                  Youth Grievance Form

Youth:                                           ID#:                            Unit:
Date:                    Time:                   AM PM                   Staff Assisting Youth:

Criterion to fill out Grievance Form:
 Youth has attempted to resolve grievance informally but youth feels there was no resolution.
 If a youth feels a “right” has been violated.

If you meet the criteria listed above, fill out grievance form. However, no grievance will be responded to unless the
resolution and “Right” you feel has been violated is written out in detail below:

Attempted Resolution (completed by youth):



Explain in detail the “Right” which you feel was violated (completed by youth):



Youth Signature:                                                                          Date:

Supervisor’s response to grievance:



Supervisor Signature:                                                             Date:

Do you agree with Supervisor’s response?      Youth Initials: Yes   No            Date:

Program Director’s response to grievance:



Program Director Signature:                                                       Date:

Do you agree with P.D.’s response?    Youth Initials: Yes      No                 Date:

Executive Director’s response to grievance:



Executive Directors Signature:                                                    Date:

Do you agree with E.D.’s response?    Youth Initials: Yes      No                 Date:

Note: Copies of the completed grievance to go to QA and Client master file; Executive Director will make the final
decision on grievances that have not been resolved.




                                                                                                                   24
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                      Family Concern Form Procedure

       Upon admission, all guardians will receive a copy of Parent Handbook.

       It is our belief that the majority of issues between clients and staff are most effectively resolved
       by talking directly to the staff person involved. This is the first step in healthy conflict
       resolution. Youth and families are encouraged to address concerns verbally with the staff
       involved prior to filing a Family Concern Form.

       Informal Resolution (talking to the staff with which you have an issue):
        Supervisors and/or Counselor/Case Managers try to resolve all family concerns informally.
          If an informal fill out family concern form.

       Family Concern Process:
        Family is encouraged to fill out form and mail to the following address:
         o KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
         o Attn: Lance Edminster
         o 200 Wanless Street
         o P.O. Box 726
         o Buhl, MN 55713-0726
        Once Family Concern Form received, someone will be following up with you.




                                                                                                              25
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                                                   Family Concern Form

       Youth:                                       ID#:                            Unit:

       Date:                   Time:                AM PM(Circle One)

       Criterion to fill out the concern Form:
        A family has attempted to resolve the concern informally but feels there was no resolution.
        If a family member feels a “right” has been violated.

       If you meet the criteria listed above, fill out the Family Concern Form:

       Family Member Name:                                          Contact Number:

       Attempted Resolution (completed by family):




       Explain in detail the “Right” which you feel was violated (completed by family):




       Family Signature:                                                            Date:


       Supervisor’s response to the concern:




       Supervisor Signature:                                                        Date:


       Do you agree with Supervisor’s response?      Family Initials: Yes     No            Date:




                                                                                                         26
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
       Program Director’s response to the concern:




       Program Director Signature:                                       Date:

       Do you agree with P.D.’s response?    Family Initials: Yes   No           Date:


       Executive Director’s response to the concern:




       Executive Directors Signature:                                    Date:

       Do you agree with E.D.’s response?    Family Initials: Yes   No           Date:




                                                                                         27
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                                         Intake Clothing List




            Gray Shorts                           2
            Yellow T-Shirts                        4
            Yellow Sweatshirt                      1
            Towels                                 2
            Wash Cloths                            2
            Underwear                              4
            Socks (pair)                           4
            Shoes                                  1
            Sandals                                1
            Swim Trunks                            1
            Laundry Bag                            1
            Pillow Case                            1
            Top Sheet                              1
            Fitted Sheet                           1
            Blanket                                1
            Hygiene Box                            1
            Deodorant                              1
            Toothbrush/Cap/Paste                 1/1/1
            Comb                                   1
            Soap/Container                        1/1
            Chap Stick                             1



           Add the following when off Run Risk


           Jeans                                  2
           Gray Shirts                            2
           White Shirts                           2
           MA (Colored Shirts)                    2
           Gray Sweatshirt                        1
           Blue Shorts                            2




                                                                                28
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
                                      Contact information

       Phone Numbers:
        Main Office Numbers:
          o 888-270-5013
          o 218-258-2274
        School:
          o 888-237-5174

       Fax:
        218-258-3807

       Address:
        KidsPeace Mesabi Academy
        P.O. Box 726
        Buhl, MN 55713-0726




                                                            29
Version 1.6 / Last Revised 05-09-13
