Student Handbook
                 New Haven, Inc.
                    Spanish Fork and Saratoga Springs Campuses




                                       Student
                              For students everywhere.




                               ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
    Thanks to New Haven’s exceptional staff for their contributions and feedback.
 Thanks to New Haven’s alumni parents for their patience, contributions, hard work,
              and for blessing us with their daughters for a season.




                                   PUBLISHED BY:
       New Haven, Incorporated 2172 East 7200 South Spanish Fork, UT 84660
                        Copyright © 2019 by New Haven, Inc.




All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
 or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by
 any information storage and retrieval system, without the written permission of the
                       Publisher, except where permitted by law.


                       Printed in the United States of America




                                                                                         2
Table of Contents

1. NEW HAVEN PHILOSOPHY........................................................ 4
2. PROGRAM OUTLINE.................................................................. 6
3. RULES AND GUIDELINES .......................................................... 9
4. POLICIES. . ................................................................................12
5. FAMILY HEALING PROGRAM....................................................15
6. MEDICAL SERVICES................................................................ 19
7. NEW HAVEN SCHOOL. . ............................................................ 20
8. YOUR RIGHTS......................................................................... 26
9. COMMONLY ASKED QUESTIONS. . ........................................... 27




                                                                                                    3
1. New Haven Philosophy

               HEALING FAMILIES. EMPOWERING GIRLS.
Our Approach to Helping Your Family
Since 1995, New Haven has been helping families heal. We recognize that each family is unique, so we
design a specific treatment plan for each individual family. We’ve also found that some aspects of treatment
are so beneficial that they have become a fundamental part of our program. Family involvement is central
to New Haven’s program. We realize that lasting change in the young women we work with can only occur if
the family changes in unison. Through family events, family therapy, and parent coaching, we invite families
to join their daughters in a process of grieving, growing, forgiving, and healing.
The family systems approach is a supportive, non-judgmental style of therapy that engages the entire
family in a cooperative process of growth. We have found that young women respond well to family-based
treatment because they know that the treatment focus is not solely on them; they no longer feel the shame
of being “the problem” in the family. We often hear parents wonder out loud why New Haven is working
when other treatment centers have not. Our research-based, heart-driven approach to family work creates
a safe emotional environment in which families can make lasting changes. A family-systems approach is
fundamentally relational. For years treatment centers were based on a behavior-modification model which
can be less effective. Research shows that one of the most effective sources of hope and change is the
relationship a troubled teenage girl has with her therapist. New Haven focuses its entire program around
nurturing healthy, healing relationships. Struggling adolescent girls are much more likely to change in a
nurturing atmosphere, where they encounter kind, competent, positive people. This allows girls to practice
new skills and positive behaviors in a context of health, so that they are prepared to return home to the
relationships that matter most – family relationships.
We know from experience and from research that lasting change occurs when the whole family is engaged
in a coordinated process of growth and change. New Haven applies all of its resources to helping families
heal from the past, thrive in the present, and move toward a hopeful future, hand-in-hand with their
daughters.
We use the following Bold Three Pillars to enable our approach: Empowerment, Relationships, and
Engagement.

I. EMPOWERMENT
While students and families coming to New Haven will experience a wide range of emotions, most everyone
feels these three things: hopeless, helpless, and out of control. Our program is designed to give that control
back through empowerment.
We empower our students by giving them clear accountability, responsibilities, and therapeutic education.
Each girl and her family will have an active part in creating their family’s Master Treatment Plan along with
the treatment team.
Our treatment program does not include a points system, but is instead based on strengthening personal
values. The Family Healing Program helps to further individualize each family’s treatment. Every student will
complete therapeutic assignments based on the values she and her family has.
To prevent stigmas, we call the girls entrusted in our care students, not clients. We will never label our
students by their diagnoses, nor will we ever divide our houses by diagnoses.
Every student has a Relational Coach to work with outside of therapy. This mentor, along with the entire
residential community, helps them practice new skills. These might include asserting their needs, conflict
resolution, and personal responsibility.
                                                                                                                 4
II. RELATIONSHIPS
One of the most enduring and fundamental aspects of New Haven’s program is our focus on relationships.
All therapy is relationship-based, not focused on behavior modification. To help heal the family system, we
teach the “connection-break-repair” cycle and model how to use it. Our staff to student ratio is the highest
in the nation.
We have several processes in place to foster relationships with our student’s families while at New Haven.
We host a therapeutically-intense family weekend six times per year. During these three days, daughters will
spend time with their parents and families, attend therapy in-person, and join in group therapy sessions.
To help our students build healthy relationships, we have created a home-like environment. We have a
home kitchen with a dinner table instead of a cafeteria, and we serve meals family-style. Students will have
roommates. This might remind them of sharing a room at home, or help them prepare for college dorms.
For many girls, their relationship with animals is just as important as their relationship with people. We have
cats, dogs, and horses on campus for them to bond with. Our students can even adopt their own cat while
at New Haven.
Students will go on multiple home visits once it is safe for them to leave campus. During these trips home,
they can reconnect with their family and practice skills in their home environment. When they are ready to
return home permanently, we offer aftercare to ease the transition. Aftercare includes a home visit from
the family therapist, coaching hours, and parent support calls. These services provide support and help to
maintain relationships during the months after your transition.

III. ENGAGEMENT
We know that talk therapy isn’t for everyone, so we offer several types of therapy to find the one that works
best. We offer several treatment modalities for individual, family, or group therapy settings:
     »» EMDR (eye movement desensitization and reprocessing)
     »» Mind-body healing
     »» Experiential therapies
     »» Enactments
     »» Adventure-based therapy
     »» Sensory modulation
     »» Somatic healing
     »» Accommodations
     »» Core issue/core meaning therapy
     »» Trauma-informed yoga
     »» Mindfulness
     »» Cognitive-behavioral therapy
     »» EAGALA (equine assisted growth and learning association)

We also offer therapeutic groups specifically for parents:
     »» Vicarious trauma support
     »» Situational planning (preparing for potential situations, instead of reacting in the moment)

By exposing our students to a multitude of therapies, we are confident that they will excel in their
therapeutic work.
A traumatic event often strips an individual of their identity. To help them rediscover who they are as well
as find their passions, each student will have an opportunity to take private lessons while at New Haven. As
they prepare to leave our treatment program, they will feel empowered, connected, and supported.
                                                                                                                  5
2. Program Outline

Therapy

INDIVIDUAL THERAPY
You have a personal Therapist who meets with you for approximately 90 minutes each week.

GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY
Masters Level Therapists provide five, 60 minute sessions of group psychotherapy each work week, divided
into the following types:

                                  General                      Adoptions
                               Relationships                  Social Skills
                                Self Esteem                     Trauma
                             Stress Management                 Emotions
                                 Life Skills               Anger Management
                               Equine Therapy                 Addictions


FAMILY THERAPY
New Haven parents participate in weekly 90 minute therapy sessions via video conference. Families must
also attend six scheduled Family Weekends per year.

NARCOTICS AND ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS
New Haven offers the 12-Step meetings for students with drug/alcohol dependency. Not all students attend
NA/AA meetings.

RECREATIONAL THERAPY
Licensed Recreational Therapists provide four- 60 minute experiential therapy groups each week. In
addition, there are two adventure days per month facilitated by the Recreational Therapist. Recreational
Therapy covers concepts such as trust, cooperation, and communication.

TREATMENT TEAM
The Treatment Team is a collective group of experienced New Haven employees that meet weekly to
discuss the treatment and future needs of each student and her family. Each house has its own Treatment
Team consisting of its Clinical Director, Clinical Therapists, Residential Director, Recreation Therapist,
Shift Supervisors, an Academic Representative, and a Nursing Representative. Parents may be invited to
participate via conference call or in person.

SUNDAY SPECIALTY MEETING
Most Sunday nights you will hear from a student or staff speaker who will focus on values such as love,
patience, hard work, future planning, honor, etc. Occasionally higher phase students will share their New
Haven journey on this night or guest speakers may come to address the community.




                                                                                                             6
Recreation

PRIVATE LESSONS
You may formally pursue your talents or interests as soon as you are on Insight Phase. You will have the
opportunity to participate in a weekly lesson of piano, dance, art, and horseback riding among many more
options.

HORSE CARE/ RIDING
You will have the opportunity to care for and ride New Haven’s horses. You will learn to saddle, bridle, brush,
and develop horsemanship skills.

OFF-CAMPUS ACTIVITIES
You will find yourself in the community or in nature at least three nights each week. Movies, shopping, day
hikes, bowling, service projects, and other wholesome leisure activities will help you discover appropriate
options for your spare time when you return home.

EXERCISE
New Haven has ample space for various types of physical activity such as yoga, resistance training, and
other aerobic activities. You will participate in a physical education class as part of school. New Haven also
competes in team sports in basketball, soccer, and volleyball.


Home Atmosphere

ALL ON-SITE
New Haven’s program is self-contained across two beautiful and expansive campuses. You will find yourself
in a warm, home-like environment with a large kitchen and comfortable dining and living spaces for your
use. The therapy offices, laundry, and nurse’s station are all located within the home’s structure.

RESIDENTIAL STAFF
New Haven’s Residential Staff will provide mentorship and support throughout your stay. There will be staff
on shift day and night to help you when you are in need. You will also be assigned a specific staff member to
support you with your Family Healing Binder work.


Community Meeting

PURPOSE
While at New Haven you will be required to attend daily Community Meetings. They are held twice a day.
The main goals of the meetings are to:
     »» Receive and give positive/constructive feedback.
     »» Express concerns.
     »» Discuss Values tasks and Phase Advancement.
     »» Set and review personal and community goals.
     »» Review the weekly schedule.
     »» Connect as a community.



                                                                                                                  7
RESPONSIBILITIES OF COMMUNITY LEADER
   »» Announce specific parts of the meeting.
     »» Call on community member when her hand is raised.
     »» Maintain order throughout the meeting.

MEETING GUIDELINES
   »» Raise hands to speak.
     »» Wait to speak until called upon by the community leader.
     »» Use gentle “I” statements when confronting another community member (Remember to do this at
        appropriate times: feedback, problems/concerns).
     »» Be cautious not to speak out of turn.
     »» Try to maintain a soft tone with all comments.
     »» Students must have their chores and rooms cleaned before attending.
     »» No eating or drinking at the meeting .

PERSONAL GOALS
   »» Each morning community members will pick personal goals they would like to focus on for that day.
     »» Each person should have no more than three goals.
     »» In the evening, each community member reports on whether or not she reached her goals.

FEEDBACK
   »» After a person states her goals, there is an opportunity for community members to give her feedback.
      The intent of feedback is to reinforce positive behaviors and to help the person recognize areas
      where changes could be made.

ANNOUNCEMENTS
   »» Time will be given during each meeting for community members to make announcements, ask
      questions, and/or share information that needs to be shared with the entire community.

STAFF
   »» Staff will use this time to offer feedback, make announcements, and discuss daily scheduling.


Family Weekend
Your family will be a vital part of your treatment at New Haven. We have several processes in place to foster
relationships with your family while at New Haven. Every eight weeks we hold a therapeutically-intense
family weekend on-campus for all New Haven families. During these three days, you will spend time with
your parents, attend therapy in-person, and join in group therapy sessions with other families. Family
Weekend provides an opportunity for your family to experience a small taste of what it is like for you every
day at New Haven. It offers an opportunity for your family to engage in valuable therapeutic work. It also
offers your family the opportunity to seek support and encouragement from other families.
Your parents/guardians are required to attend each Family Weekend. Siblings are not required to attend.
Their involvement in Family Weekend will be decided upon by you, your parents, and your Therapist.
However, siblings are invited to our Sibling Family Weekend held one-time per year. This event is designed
with activities and groups for the entire family.


                                                                                                                8
3. Rules and Guidelines

New Haven has carefully and thoughtfully selected a set of value based rules and guidelines to support a
positive and safe environment for its students, their families and staff. Our goal is for each student to learn to
see the value and meaning behind rules and laws and use that knowledge to help them make positive choices.

RESPECT
  1. No swearing or vulgarity, or tasteless joke-telling.
   2. No yelling.
   3. No foot, neck, or back massages.
   4. Students may not go into other students’ bedrooms or bathrooms without staff permission.
   5. Any more than 1 girl in a bathroom and the door must remain open.
   6. No piggy-back rides or anything similar to it.
   7. Students may not draw or trace patterns or designs on their bodies.
   8. Students may not pierce their bodies while at New Haven.
   9. Students may not wear jewelry in a pierced body part other than an ear.
   10. No kissing each other (cheeks, mouths, etc.).
   11. No wandering the halls with a towel. Students should take clothes into the bathroom before they
       shower and change there.
   12. No cuddling or holding hands.
   13. No lying under blankets together.
   14. No borrowing of clothes or personal hygiene items.
   15. No conversations about inappropriate topics, including war stories.

CLEANLINESS
  1. No food or drink (except water) in any room but the kitchen.
   2. Students may not have bare feet in the house. Socks or shoes must be worn at all times.
   3. Clothing should be clean, free of holes and markings, and activity appropriate.
   4. Hair must be clean and combed; no “dread locks”.
   5. Bodies should be clean and well-manicured; students are to shower every day.
   6. New Haven provides students with basic personal hygiene items such as toothpaste, soap, shampoo,
      deodorant, toilet paper, and tissues. Students must have permission from their guardians to purchase
      special personal hygiene items, as these items must be purchased with funds from the students’
      trust account.
   7. Each student is responsible to wash and care for her own linens once each week.
   8. Students may not hang anything on the walls, even with tape; only the provided magnet board may be
      used to display decorations.
   9. Students may not alter or vandalize their own or other students’ clothing or shoes.

HEALTH
  1. Students may only eat what is served for meals and snacks.
   2. Parents may not send food or drink.
   3. Food or drink may not be brought back from off campus passes; this includes leftovers.
                                                                                                                     9
  4. Students must be in their rooms by 10:00pm and the lights must be out at 10:15. Students may go to
     bed earlier if community meeting has ended and they have completed their nightly responsibilities.
  5. Students may take a sick day if they manifest the following symptoms: fever, observed vomiting, pale
     or flushed skin, strong feelings of nausea, dizziness or intense aches or pains. The prevailing rule is
     this: If a student is sick enough to miss school, she is sick enough to miss activities. Shift Supervisors
     should notify the Nurse when a student is ill. The nurse will decide if the student is on sickbed.
     Sickbed generally last 24 hours.
  6. Staff will serve food portions to students. Students must eat what is cooked, or not at all. Vegetarian
     and other special diet meals are provided upon approval.

SAFETY
  1. New Haven does not allow unsafe clothing or jewelry.
  2. Students may not wear industrial-style chains or other objects as jewelry.
  3. Students may not wear thick leather cuffs, collars, or studded leather of any kind.

MODESTY
 1. Students should wear bras at all times. They do not have to wear bras when sleeping.
  2. Students should not wear underwear as an outer garment.
  3. Students should not sleep in the nude or in their underwear, nor may they wear day clothes to bed.
  4. Students should not wear leggings, Spandex pants, or tights without a top or shorts that goes to mid-
     thigh.
  5. Students may wear sleeveless shirts and dresses as long as the straps are 2 fingers in width. No
     camisoles or “spaghetti strap” tops are allowed to be worn without a shirt on top or underneath. This
     remains a rule even in the summer months. Tops cannot be low cut; they must cover the bra, and may
     not show the stomach.
  6. Employees should not be able to see the skin on a student’s stomach if she lifts her arms up or out to
     her side.
  7. Students may wear skirts as long as they are knee length (it must touch their knees).
  8. Students may wear shorts as long as they are at least mid-thigh in length.

MODERATION
 1. Students may not dress in all black.
  2. Dresses may not be lower than the top of the ankle.
  3. Hair may not cover eyes.
  4. Students may not change their hair color without parent and Treatment Team approval.
  5. Students must have permission from their parents and Treatment Team to shave any part of their
     head or change their hairstyle.
  6. Makeup must not draw undue attention.
  7. Students should not wear any amount of jewelry or clothing that draws undue attention.
  8. No gauge earrings.

LIFE/NO TOLERATION FOR DRUGS OR GANGS
  1. No hemp jewelry.
  2. No gang signs.
  3. New Haven prohibits any article of clothing that draws undue attention to a student in a negative
     manner, or identifies her as belonging to any subculture (i.e., gangs, hip-hop, druggies, skateboarders,
     rappers, grunge, vampires, gothics, etc.).
                                                                                                                  10
  4. Students may wear woven hats or beanies during the appropriate season. Staff reserves the right to
     determine when it is appropriate.
  5. New Haven disapproves of any symbol the Treatment Team deems inappropriate: anarchy, marijuana
     leaf, mushroom, gang “signs” or “tags”, “Jerry Bears”, pacifiers, alien head, flowery VW bus, Billabong,
     bandanas, 4:20 etc. No skulls or symbols of death.
  6. Students may not wear excessively saggy or baggy pants. Staff reserves the right to determine what
     is excessive.

INDIVIDUAL WORTH
  1. Students may not cut their own hair; they may not cut another student’s hair; no student may dye her
     own or another student’s hair.
  2. Students may not wear clothing or have posters or merchandise that displays the name or symbol of
     a music group.
  3. Students may not have or read magazines while at New Haven.

HONESTY
  1. If a student steals, she should return the stolen goods. If she cannot return the goods in the same
     condition as she acquired them, then she will make whatever restitution the owner of the goods
     decides is satisfactory. If the owner requires monetary restitution, New Haven will pay the owner out
     of the student’s deposit. The student will work for New Haven at minimum wage to pay the deposit
     back. The student will further correct her mistake by completing the following:
  2. Student will apologize to the owner of the goods, whenever possible, face-to-face.
  3. Student will tell parents personally of her mistake.
  4. Student will complete work hours. Treatment Team decides how many hours on a case- by case basis.
  5. Student drops at least to Expectation Phase until she completes these requirements.
  6. If a student steals three times while at New Haven, we will strongly move to have the third offense
     (and any future offenses) show on the student’s permanent record.

MUSIC/MEDIA
 1. Students may only listen to uplifting music that the Treatment Team approves.
  2. Students may not bring their own music to New Haven, nor may they have personal iPods, CD
     players, nor stereos of any kind, until they are on Interdependence Phase (including during travel)
     unless approved by Treatment Team.
  3. Music devices needed for relaxation purposes at night will be provided by New Haven upon
     permission from the Therapist.
  4. Staff maintains control of the radios in the cars and on the unit. Insight Phase students and higher
     may also use the radios with staff permission.
  5. Students may listen to the radio when a staff is present. The Staff reserves the right to determine any
     song unapproved if the music is inappropriate in their opinion.
  6. Personal CD’s, movies, video games, video game systems, stereos, etc. that are brought to New
     Haven are donated to the community and permanently become New Haven property.

SPIRITUALITY
According to their legal rights, students may have contact with clergy from the religion of their choice.
Students may attend church if the students are not safety risks.




                                                                                                                11
4. Policies

Family and Friends

VISITS AND PASSES
   First Month
   In order to allow you time to acclimate to the program, visits during your first month (outside of
   family therapy) are strongly discouraged. The Treatment Team must approve any requests, including
   emergencies that may require a visit during this time period.

   Visits/Day Passes
   Our visitation policy reflects and supports reintegrating you into your family. All visits should have a
   therapeutic purpose. Once you have achieved Exploration Phase, New Haven encourages day passes and
   on campus visits as directed by Treatment Team.

   Off Campus Overnight Passes
   We encourage families to complete overnight passes, as directed by Treatment Team, once their family
   has achieved Insight Phase. Overnight passes can be spent close to New Haven or at home. However, at
   least three family home passes are required as part of the program, one of them being extended (at least
   10 days). These passes allow your family opportunities to apply and practice the skills you have learned
   in your home setting before completing the program.

TELEPHONE POLICIES
   First Two Weeks
   You may not have phone contact with anyone (outside of family therapy) for the first two weeks so that
   you may become acclimated to New Haven.

   Weekly Phone Privileges
   You will be allowed one call home (outside of therapy) per week. When you have been at New Haven for
   two weeks, the Residential Director will assign your family a Sunday call time. Parents need permission
   from the Residential Director/Therapist to speak with their daughter on any other day.

EMAIL POLICY
New Haven is dedicated to providing their students with a positive and safe environment. A student should
only be in contact with family and friends that are a positive and supportive influence. All outgoing emails
must be sent to your parents first. Your parents can then decide if the letter is appropriate to forward to the
recipient if they so desire. All incoming emails must go through your parents first as well. Your parents can
then decide whether or not to forward the email to the you.

MAIL POLICY
All letters and packages must be from your parent approved contact list.




                                                                                                                  12
Student Information

GRIEVANCE
Any student, regardless of status, has the right to write a grievance about whatever she pleases.
  1. Once written, the Shift Supervisor then places the grievance in the Residential Director’s box.
  2. The Residential Director forwards the grievance to the appropriate Director.
  3. The student should expect a verbal acknowledgment of the reception of the grievance within 3
     working days. She should expect a written response from the appropriate Director within 7 working
     days.

Employees are not obligated to respond to anonymous grievances.

PERSONAL PROPERTY
   Incoming/Outgoing Property
   Staff will search incoming and outgoing property. This includes packages, suitcases/bags and the
   student’s person.

   Storage of Personal Property
   Students are responsible to maintain their rooms in an orderly fashion. It is not uncommon for a
   student to have more personal property than can be neatly arranged in her room. Students can either
   take excess property home, or store it at New Haven. Each student is given a large bin to keep excess
   property in. If she has more items than can be stored in her room and bin then the excess must be sent
   home at the family’s expense.

   Important Warning
   New Haven is not responsible for the loss or destruction of any student’s personal property. Parents
   should not send items of high monetary value to their child. New Haven will return expensive items at
   the parent’s expense.

   Required Personal Items
   Due to space limitations, students are limited to the amount of clothing and other personal items they
   may have while at New Haven. New Haven has compiled a list of items required for the program. Any
   items not listed or in excess of the amounts listed must be approved by the Residential Director or they
   will be boxed up and sent home.

   7    Jeans/Pants                      1   Swimsuit (One-piece only)      1   Winter Coat
   10   Shirts or Blouses                1   Dress Shoes                    1   Winter Gloves
   15   Underwear                        1   Work Shoes / Boots             2   Jackets
   10   Bras (sports and regular)        1   Tennis Shoes                   1   Winter Boots
   12   Socks                            1   Sandals                        2   Towels
   5    Athletic Shorts (PE)             1   Shower Shoes / Sandals         1   Electric Razor
   5    T-Shirts                         4   Pajamas                        1   Toothbrush
   3    Sweatshirts                      1   Nice Dress / Outfit            1   Brush / Comb
   1    Comforter and Set of Sheets (Twin)




                                                                                                              13
Suggested Items
Students are allowed, but not required to bring the additional items listed.

        Journal / Stationery
        Calculator (Graphing if needed)
        Makeup
        Hair dryer, hair straightener...
        Jewelry
        Stuffed Animals (2 max)


Banned Items
These items are not allowed on New Haven’s campus.

        Glass (such as in picture frames)      Aerosol Sprays
        Knives                                 Cigarettes
        Mouthwash                              Lighters / Matches
        Pornography                            Ceramics
        Straight Razors                        Outside Food Items
        Magnets (New Haven provides
                                               Stuffed Animals (2 max)
       magnets for magnet boards)




                                                                               14
5. Family Healing Program

The Family Healing Program is a value based program designed to empower your family as you identify,
explore, and live by your personal and family values. Nearly everything you do in order to progress while at
New Haven is contained in the Family Healing Program. It is comprised of five phases. Each phase has been
carefully named and given a symbol to represent your journey through New Haven. The first two Phases
begin with the prefix “EX” (external). The last three Phases begin with the prefix “IN” (internal), which
represents the shift from being externally to internally motivated.
     »» Expectation Phase ~ North Star Symbol
     »» Exploration Phase ~ Footprint Symbol
     »» Insight Phase ~ Sun Symbol
     »» Integrity Phase ~ Heart Symbol
     »» Interdependence Phase ~ Circle of Life Symbol

As you and your family journey through the Family Healing Program you will be supported both collectively
and individually by New Haven staff, therapists, teachers, nurses, peers, etc. Our goal is for you to make
peace with your past, thrive in the present and create a hopeful future, together, with the support of your
family. Below is a detailed description explaining the different aspects of the Family Healing Program:


Relational Coach
Within a day or two of arriving at New Haven, you will be assigned a “Relational Coach”. This staff member
will be your personal “coach” as you work through the program. He/She will explain the program to you,
help you work on your bead and phase Assignments. He/She will also be the main person to take you on off-
campus passes until you are on Integrity Phase.


Phase Work
Each phase has assignments which you will complete before moving to the next phase. These assignments
incorporate all aspects of your treatment, including individual therapy, family therapy, recreational therapy,
academics, and developing your personal values. They are divided up into four sections. You will need to
complete Student Assignments for each Phase. Your parents will have Parent Assignments to complete. The
Family Assignments and Transition Assignments will be completed in family therapy, on your family phone
calls, or on passes. To be eligible for Phase Advancement, you must have the assignments from all four
sections completed and signed. Successful transition from the program includes completing all five phases
of the program.


Prioritizing Your Values
An important part of New Haven’s philosophy is Values. We believe that we will be happier when our actions
are aligned with our values. To help you discover your values, you will have the opportunity to identify and
define 10 or more of your personal and family values. This will be done at the beginning of your New Haven
journey. You will identify your top 10 values again toward the end of the program. This allows you the
opportunity to reflect on personal growth and changes within your values since arriving at New Haven.



                                                                                                                 15
Value Beads
On each Phase you will be asked to complete a specific number of value beads. A value bead is a module
consisting of 10 suggested tasks to help you learn about and apply that value to your life. Once you have
completed 6 tasks, you have earned the bead. Your Therapist will pick 4 of the tasks for you to do, your
Mentor will pick one task, and you will choose one, for a total of six tasks. Once you have completed all 6
tasks you will be presented with an actual bead at a Values Ceremony. In addition, there are Family and
Therapy Beads that can be assigned by your Therapist.


Personal Therapeutic Assignments
There are several requirements throughout the Phases that are designed to help you explore yourself. These
may include writing an autobiography, memorizing quotes, doing collages, planning activities, etc.


Subjective Requirements
There are some requirements for each phase that cannot be physically done, but are qualities and behaviors
we would like to see you exhibit. These include honesty, respect, maturity, etc. These are requirements you
will need to be working on in addition to the tasks each phase requires. Sometimes you may have completed
all the assignments to earn a Phase, but if you are not demonstrating the qualities we think are necessary to
earn that Phase, you may not advance.


Peer Feedback
One requirement for each phase is that you obtain peer feedback. Each phase has a specific Peer Feedback
Form found in the Family Healing Binder. Approximately one week prior to applying for phase advancement
you will pass out the phase specific form to each peer. They will write their feedback on the sheet and then
turn it in to a staff member. Treatment Team will read the peer feedback and if the majority is positive the
requirement will be signed off in your Family Healing Binder. If the majority of your feedback is not positive,
then the requirement will not be signed off, and you will not be eligible for the phase advancement.


Phase Advancement
In order to apply, you must have your assignments done and signed for that Phase. You should not apply
if there is anything within your power to complete that you haven’t. Once all of your assignments are
completed, you will fill out a Phase Application. These are found in the back of each section of your Family
Healing Binder. The Phase Application is something you, your parents, and your Relational Coach must fill
out prior to applying. Once you have filled out the application, it must be submitted to Treatment Team,
along with your entire Family Healing Binder. Treatment Team will make sure that all of your assignments
as well as your parent and family assignments are complete. They will then discuss your progress toward
that Phase. Treatment Team will then determine your family’s Phase and your Therapist will inform you of
the decision after Treatment Team has ended. It is not uncommon for girls to have to apply for a Phase more
than once, so don’t be too discouraged if you do not get your Phase on the first try. Phase applications must
be filled out each time you apply, even if it is for the same Phase.


Values Ceremony
Every other month, you will attend a Values Ceremony. This is where you will be publicly acknowledged for
the hard work you’ve done in earning Value Beads, as well as for advancing Phases.


                                                                                                                  16
Value Passes
Occasionally you will be assigned a value assignment or need clothing or hygiene items that require an off-
campus pass. These are called Value Passes. You must be accompanied by your Relational Coach for these
passes. If your Relational Coach is a male, then another female staff must go with you. A pass form must
be filled out, approved by your therapist, a nurse, a teacher, the Recreation Therapist, and the Residential
Director and submitted for your pass to take place. You must plan passes well in advance. If your pass
requires money, then you must fill out the appropriate request form several days prior to your pass to obtain
money.


Phase Explanations and Privileges

SAFETY
Upon admission to New Haven you and your family are placed on Safety. Safety is not one of the five
Phases of Healing. However, it is an important step in you and your family’s process of building trust and
committing to physical and emotional safety. This consists of higher levels of external structure while
you are learning New Haven’s expectations. During this time, you and your family are preparing to create
supportive relationships with the New Haven community.


  Student Privileges                                        Family Privileges
   1. Must be within 5 feet of staff at all times.          1. May not have visits or phone calls.
   2. While in bathroom, the door must be cracked and the   2. May communicate through email or letters.
      student must be counting.
   3. May not go off-campus without a therapist.
   4. May not wear jewelry.
   5. May not wear shoes in the house.


EXPECTATION PHASE
On Expectation Phase of Healing you and your family learn New Haven’s rules, boundaries, structure and
other expectations. You and your family are learning about family and societal expectations and applying
them into your daily actions. Your motivation is external in this phase of healing. Supportive supervision and
environmental structure is needed.


  Student Privileges                                        Family Privileges
   1. Must be in line of sight of staff at all times.       1. 20 minute supervised phone call.
   2. Bathroom door may be closed.                          2. Visits on campus.
   3. May sleep in a room other than the Safety room.
   4. May wear approved jewelry.
   5. May wear shoes in the house.
   6. May go off campus for activities.


EXPLORATION PHASE
On Exploration Phase of Healing you are still externally motivated while you and your family begin to
explore and rediscover your values. You learn to establish an attitude of openness to new information about
yourselves, specifically self-defeating behaviors. You still manifest the necessity of continual staff direction.
You are mostly teachable, open to learn in therapy and school, and are compliant with expectations. Your
family is able to give feedback in respectful ways and receive it non-defensively, as well as identify and
acknowledge treatment issues.


                                                                                                                    17
  Student Privileges                                              Family Privileges
   1. May be alone for 15 min with staff approval.                1. 30 minute unsupervised phone call each week.
                                                                  2. Off campus visits, but not overnight.




INSIGHT PHASE
During Insight Phase internal motivation is more evident. You and your family are able to verbalize
personal insights into what you do and why you do it. You are aware of ego-defense mechanisms and their
destructive nature. You and your family display a willingness to be open and honest, and are working to
restore trust. Relationships with others become key in learning about self.


  Student Privileges                                              Family Privileges
   1. One, 10 min supervised friend phone call.                   1. Begin off-campus, overnight passes.
   2. May be alone for 30 min with staff approval.                2. 60 min unsupervised phone call each week.
   3. Will begin a private lesson of her choice.




INTEGRITY PHASE
Integrity means wholeness. Your family manifests a genuine change of heart and attitude. You and your
family are constantly learning and consistently demonstrating internal motivation. Individual and family
values become part of daily living and decision making. You display leadership and are an example to the
community around you. Your family is sincere in therapy and active in transition planning.


  Student Privileges                                              Family Privileges
   1. Three, 15 min supervised phone calls to approved friends.   1. Unlimited time family phone call each week.
   2. May be alone for up to 1 hour with staff approval.          2. Extended off-campus passes which involve friends.
   3. May plan and take part in approved Fun Passes.
   4. May begin technology use with a Technology Contract in
      place.



INTERDEPENDENCE PHASE
When a family becomes Interdependent, they value growth, accountability, independence and responsibility.
Your individual family members are driven by an internal motivation and feel a sense of self-confidence
and worth. Your family understands that it is healthy to provide and receive appropriate levels of guidance,
support and structure. You and your family members are resilient to stress, remain flexible, and are
intentional in your relationships. A state of interdependence allows your family to continue the process of
healing and growth in your future together.


  Student Privileges
   1. Student may be off campus for a pre-determined amount of time (decided by parents and Treatment Team).
   2. May be alone for up to 4 hours with staff approval.
   3. Student may have an increase in technology use as per the Technology Contract.
   4. Student may have an allowance (instead of trust account). Amount will be determined by parents and Treatment Team.
      Because of liability, money will still be kept locked up.
   5. Student will work with the nurse to take more responsibility for her medication.


                                                                                                                           18
6. Medical Services

24-Hour Nursing
New Haven employs Registered Nurses and other certified nursing professionals on campus from early
morning until evening to ensure your medical safety and stability. Nurses are on-call 24 hours a day in case
of an emergency.


Psychiatric and Nutrition Support
New Haven contracts with local Psychiatric and Nutrition providers to manage the care of the students
on campus. The contracted Psychiatrist/Psychiatric NP meets with students within the first week of
admission, 2 weeks after admission, and every 4-6 weeks thereafter. New Haven contracts with Registered
Dietitians that meet regularly with our students.


Medical Appointments
The New Haven Nursing Department is happy to provide you with urgent and supplemental medical
care while at New Haven. In the event that you have an urgent medical need or condition, the Nursing
department will provide care for this in the form of immediate treatment, doctor’s visits, and follow up
treatment.
If you have a chronic medical condition that requires regular checkups with a specialist, the Nurses will take
you to maintenance appointments and care for your medical needs. Once you have reached a Phase that
allows you to go on home passes, families are encouraged to make use of these home passes to address
ongoing medical problems and maintenance appointments with their local health care providers.




                                                                                                                 19
7. New Haven School

                      New Haven School Mission Statement
                                          AWAKEN AMBITION FOR:
                                                  LEARNING
                                                 RESILIENCY
                                                 LEADERSHIP


Academic Policies
New Haven’s academic policies set it apart from other schools with a similar student population. We are
committed to academic excellence as part of the emotional healing for our students. We believe that a
student will not be truly healed unless she learns to demonstrate emotional regulation and resiliency in the
classroom. We teach this to students by asking them to manage high academic expectations while they are
engaged in the therapeutic change process. This is the only way students gain confidence that they can be
successful at college prep academics when life is difficult. In other words, successfully manage their life at
home and be healed.

1. GRADING POLICY - GENERAL
    »» Parents will receive a PIN to access the school portal just after admission.
     »» Teachers will update grades for each class every week. Parents can check grades on the school portal.
     »» Academic eligibility for participation in residential programming requiring privileges is determined
        each week prior to programming activity beginning.
     »» Athletic eligibility is determined each week prior to games being played.

2. ACADEMIC GRADING POLICY
Our academic grades are based on traditional models of “letter” grades. Every nine weeks a student earns
a letter grade in the range of A to F for a Term. As we are an academic institution, grades are a method
of determining the effectiveness of the learning that occurs in the classroom. Semester grades, not Term
grades, will be put on a student’s transcript. A Semester grade is the average of the two Term (9 week)
grades.
We post a High Honor Roll and Honor Roll every term. To be on the High Honor Roll the student must have a
3.5 GPA with no grade lower than a C+. A 3.0 with no D’s or F’s is required for the Honor Roll.
The grades we give are based on percentages and are as follows:



        100-94 = A (4.0)                      82-80 = B- (2.7)                      69-67 = D+ (1.3)

        93-90 = A- (3.7)                      79-77 = C+ (2.3)                        66-63 = D (1.0)

        89-87 = B+ (3.3)                      76-73 = C (2.0)                       62-60 = D- (0.7)

         86-83 = B (3.0)                      72-70 = C- (1.7)                 59 & BELOW = F (0.0)
3. HOMEWORK
                                                                                                                 20
Students should expect to complete an average of at least 30 minutes of homework per hour of class in
each subject. The majority of this homework is done during a teacher-lead advisory period during which
students can receive help from their teachers. Additional homework time is available in the homes in the
evenings and on weekends.

4. CREDIT FOR STUDENTS ENTERING AFTER THE START OF A TERM
It may not be possible for students arriving after the start of a term to earn a full term credit in all classes.
When a student arrives after the start of a term, it is at the individual teacher’s and Academic Director’s
discretion whether or not that student has earned credit for the entire term. The faculty will use various
criteria to determine credit earned. If possible, students will take double classes in certain subjects in order
to complete enough assignments to earn full credit for the term in the specified classes.

5. NEW HAVEN SCHOOL GRADES WORK ON A ROLLING SYSTEM
Term grades indicate only where the student is at that moment in the semester. The Final semester grade
is calculated at the end of the semester (after Term 2 and Term 4). In order for a student to earn any portion
of semester credit, they must successfully pass the semester. If a student fails the semester, regardless of
individual term grades, they will not receive partial credit. If a student leaves before successfully completing
the New Haven program and before the end of a Term, they will NOT receive credit. Students leaving
before the end of a grading term will have W (withdraw) on their transcript for the classes in which they
are enrolled and be provided exit grades (the grades they were earning on the date they left along with the
dates they were enrolled in the current term), but will not be awarded credit.

6. TO ENSURE FULL CREDIT FOR A GRADING TERM, STUDENTS NEED TO LEAVE NEW HAVEN
SCHOOL WITH DEPARTURE DATES THAT COINCIDE WITH THE END OF THE 6 GRADING
TERMS.
(End of Term 1 - November, End of Semester 1 - January, End of Term 3 - March, End of Semester 2 - June, End
of Summer Session 1 - July, & End of Summer Session 2 – August)
Exact dates for the end of the terms are available on the school year calendar. Students who depart at any
time other than the last day of a grading term will not be awarded credit for the term unless the treatment
team determines that they have successfully completed the program indicated by earning Interdependence
and remaining on Interdependence for at least 30 days and the independent work that is assigned to the
student is completed and returned for grading.

7. HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATION POLICY
New Haven holds High School Graduation once per year in June. If a Senior will be completing graduation
requirements in August, she will participate in the June graduation ceremony, but will not be given the
actual diploma until all coursework has been completed. If a student completes the New Haven program
and all High School graduation requirements, but departs New Haven on a date different than the end of
the semester in June, the student is welcome to return and participate in the next scheduled graduation
ceremony.
Any student who wishes to graduate from High School prior to their natural graduation date (when their
class is scheduled to graduate) must also complete the New Haven program in order to meet all the New
Haven High School Graduation Requirements.

8. ACADEMIC PLAN POLICY
Upon entering New Haven School, the registrar does an Academic Plan for every student. This summarizes
the credits that the student has received from previously attended schools as well as itemizes what the
student is missing for graduation from New Haven School. This plan is used as the basis for scheduling
classes for the student. The Academic Plan is shared with parents, student and is reviewed at every on-
campus parent weekend conference.


                                                                                                                    21
9. CREDIT ACCEPTATION
New Haven School accepts credit granted for academic courses from other accredited schools. However,
some elective credit previously granted may not meet Utah State Core Curriculum and New Haven School
standards. These courses are listed on the transcript, but credit is not recognized.
Many students arrive at New Haven School having spent previous time in wilderness or transitional
programs. These programs do issue school credit. However, many of the programs are not accredited. In
order to maintain the academic integrity that has been established at New Haven School, the transcripts are
reviewed and some credit is issued for time spent in those programs. The credit that is issued is dependent
on a review of the program and how it relates to the Utah State / New Haven School requirements. Many of
the credits issued may not transfer at their full value that is indicated by the unaccredited program and will
most likely be counted as general elective credit.
It is important to note that every accredited program has determined their own policy regarding the
acceptance of credits granted by an unaccredited institution. If a student transfers from one school to
another, this credit may be reassessed.

10. SCHEDULING THERAPY
To ensure that important academic instruction is not missed, therapy should not be scheduled during core
academic classes. This includes family therapy. Therapy can be scheduled during the advisory period from
11:35-1:00 MST. If you are having trouble scheduling family therapy, please contact the Academic Director
to discuss any available options.


Classroom Expectations
     »» Arrive on time
     »» Arrive prepared with pen, pencil, paper, and books
     »» Listen to and follow instructions
     »» Show respect for teacher and peers
     »» Turn in work on time
     »» Do not return to the house except for lunch
     »» Wear dress code at all times
     »» Be monitored by staff on the computer at all times
     »» Do not bring your phone to school
     »» Be considerate ... Keep the noise level low in both the classroom and the hallways


Academic Calendar and Schedule

SCHOOL CALENDAR
The School Calendar is e-mailed to parents just after admission to New Haven School. A copy is also
available at each on campus parent conference.

STANDARDIZED TEST DATES
ACT and SAT dates are listed on the school calendar. ACT and SAT tests are not given on campus. The PSAT
is given on campus in October and is open to all students in 10th and 11th grade. AP tests are given in May
on-campus at New Haven.



                                                                                                                 22
DAILY ACADEMIC SCHEDULE


                                    Academic Schedule
                                                                                          FRIDAY
                     MONDAY          TUESDAY         WEDNESDAY         THURSDAY
                                                                                        (alternates)

   8:00 - 9:25       Period 1         Period 4         Period 1         Period 4       Period 1 or 4


   9:30-10:55        Period 2         Period 5         Period 2         Period 5       Period 2 or 5


  11:00-11:30                                           Lunch


   11:35-1:00                              Advisory / College Success Class


   1:05-2:30         Period 3         Period 6         Period 3         Period 6       Period 3 or 6



Academic Advising and Progress Reporting
Each student is assigned an Academic Advisor when she enrolls at New Haven School. The Academic
Advisor works with students daily in the Advisory/College Success Class. The Academic Advisor attends the
weekly Treatment Team meeting for the house in which his/her advisees live. The Academic Advisor is the
main point of academic contact for parents who have questions or concerns about student behavior in class
or grades.
The Academic Advisor will contact the parents via phone or email on a monthly basis. If a teacher or advisor
sees a student who is struggling, additional contacts will be made. Academic Advisors will also be present
during monthly parent call-ins to Treatment Team.
Credit is awarded at the end of each semester or summer term depending on the course description.
Report cards will be posted on the school portal at the end of every term. Grades are put on the students’
transcripts at the end of each semester.
Upon entering New Haven School, the registrar does an academic plan for every student. This summarizes
the credits that the student has received from previously attended programs as well as itemizes what
the student is missing for graduation from New Haven School. The academic plan is used as the basis for
scheduling classes for the student and is reviewed at every on campus parent conference.


Credit

CRITERIA FOR ACCEPTING CREDIT:
New Haven School accepts credit granted for academic courses from other accredited schools. However,
some elective credit previously granted may not meet Utah State Core Curriculum and New Haven School
standards. These courses are listed on the transcript, but credit is not recognized.
Many students arrive at New Haven School having spent previous time in wilderness or transitional
programs. These programs do issue school credit. However, many of the programs are not accredited. In
order to maintain the academic integrity that has been established at New Haven School, the transcripts are
reviewed and some credit is issued for time spent in those programs. The credit that is issued is dependent

                                                                                                               23
on a review of the program and how it relates to the Utah State/New Haven School requirements. Many of
the credits issued may not transfer at their full value that is indicated by the unaccredited program and are
most likely counted toward elective credit.
It is important to note that every accredited program has determined their own policy regarding the
acceptance of credits granted by an unaccredited institution. If a student transfers from one school to
another, this credit may be reassessed.

CREDIT AWARDED
New Haven School grants credit based on the following scale:
     »» .25 CREDIT = 36 hours of school work or 1 Term Credit
     »» .50 CREDIT = 72 hours of school work or 1 Semester Credit
     »» 1.0 CREDIT = 144 hours of school work or 1 Year Credit

**In addition to academic class credit, students earn 0.50 credit each semester in either Health, Teen Living
or Adult Roles/Responsibilities as the New Haven therapeutic and residential programs meet and exceed
the standards required for credit in those courses.


High School Graduation Requirements
New Haven School sets its graduation requirements based on the college-prep graduation requirements.
24 credits are required, which must include:
     »» 4 credits of English
     »» 3 credits of Math (through Algebra II)
     »» 3 credits of Science (1 life science, 1 physical science, & 1 chemical science)
     »» 3 credits of Social Sciences (1 World, 1 US Hist & .50 Geog &.50 US Gov’t)
     »» 2 credits of Foreign Language
     »» 1.5 credits of Fine Art
     »» 1 credit of Career & Technical
     »» 0.50 credit of Computer Technology
     »» 0.50 credit of Financial Literacy
     »» 2 credits of Physical Education (which must include 0.5 credit of Health)
     »» 3.5 credits of General Electives


Academic Services
In addition to some formal academic assistance programs, the teachers at New Haven School have an “open
door” policy. This allows the students to meet with teachers during the advisory period and during lunch.
Additional help after school can be scheduled with therapist approval.

ACADEMIC ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS:
   »» Advisory - Academic teachers are all available during the advisory period that is scheduled for 90
      minutes daily. After a student checks in with her academic advisor and receives a daily lesson geared
      toward enhancing executive functioning skills, study skills and college/career readiness skills, a
      student may receive individual or group help from the academic teacher of her choice.
     »» Lunch Study Help - Academic teachers are often available prior and during lunch to assist students.

                                                                                                                24
     »» Academic Enrichment Group - With therapist approval, a student can be scheduled to attend a
        weekly study group in place of a therapeutic group that is led by the academic teachers and provides
        additional support for students who are struggling in school.
     »» Academic Detention - if a student is struggling academically the academic advisor will put the
        student on a study intensive program restricting the student’s time for socialization without
        jeopardizing therapeutic programming.

COLLEGE PLANNING SERVICES:
   »» College Counselor - a qualified individual is available to our students to assist in choosing post
      graduate placement as well as to guide them through the application process.
     »» A specific college exploration/application unit is taught in Senior English classes to allow students
        access to information regarding college selection, group and individual help from the college
        counselor, guidance in writing personal statements and time to complete applications.
     »» Students can be registered to take the SAT or ACT tests on national test dates at a Utah testing
        center. The school registrar/college counselor is available to help parents with the registration
        process and coordinate with staff to transport students to the testing center.
     »» PSAT test is given in October every year on campus at New Haven and is open to all sophomores and
        juniors for a small fee.
     »» AP tests are given each year in May on campus at New Haven. Students who are enrolled in an AP
        class are encouraged to take the test. College Board fees apply.

SPECIAL EDUCATION SERVICES:
   »» Certified Special Education Coordinator - oversees all aspects of a student’s IEP or 504 plan.

ACADEMIC ADVISOR PROGRAM:
   »» Upon enrollment each student is assigned to a teacher as an academic advisee.
     »» The teacher with his/her group of advisees meets formally every day. The Academic Advisor helps
        students to know their grades and any missing assignments, teaches executive functioning and
        college readiness skills, checks planners and helps students devise a plan for good use of advisory
        time and homework hour.
     »» Teachers meet once a week to receive feedback from other teachers on designated advisees.
     »» Academic Advisors evaluate students’ college and career readiness skills as demonstrated in the
        classroom and signs off on readiness for phase advancement per the Learning Rubric.
     »» Academic Advisors are the main communication between parents/guardians and the academic
        program through regular phone calls/emails and participation in monthly treatment team parent
        check-ins.




                                                                                                                25
8. Your Rights

New Haven shall support and protect your fundamental rights, listed below:
  1. You have access to treatment regardless of race, sex, age, disability, or ethnicity.
  2. New Haven recognizes and respects your personal dignity. New Haven does not tell anyone outside
     New Haven anything about you.
  3. New Haven provides you with an individualized treatment plan. New Haven reviews the
     plan periodically.
  4. New Haven provides you with the least restrictive environment possible.
  5. You receive adequate and humane services regardless of the source of your financial support.
  6. New Haven seeks your opinion when planning your treatment.
  7. New Haven provides an adequate number of qualified, competent, experienced staff to help you with
     your treatment plans.
  8. If a doctor orders you to stay in bed, or to stay inside, New Haven will review the orders every
     three days.
  9. Your family and significant others may visit you unless a Treatment Team says otherwise.
  10. If you have visitors, they may see you in private unless it is therapeutically unwise.
  11. You may send and receive mail without restriction unless your parents say otherwise.
  12. You may have private telephone conversations with family and friends unless your Phase or Primary
      Therapist indicates otherwise.
  13. New Haven will explain all restrictions to you and your family.
  14. You may pay for a consultant to come to New Haven and review your treatment plan.
  15. New Haven will explain these rights to you in a way that you can understand.
  16. If you are admitted to New Haven on court order, then New Haven will explain your responsibilities
      and your guardians’ to each of you.
  17. You have access to education.
  18. You have access to religion if desired.
  19. Any work you do at New Haven outside of chores must be voluntary, or New Haven must pay you
      for it.
  20. You have a right to assistance from New Haven employees in helping you with any physical pain you
      might have, which includes: understanding the typical coping responses to pain; questions about
      using controlled substances; changes in mood; knowledge of pain management techniques; the effect
      and meaning of pain on you and your family.
  21. If you turn 18 during your stay and would like to exercise your right to vote, communicate your
      interest and New Haven will help you with the process.




                                                                                                           26
9. Commonly Asked Questions

1. WHEN CAN I CONTACT MY PARENTS?
Upon admission you may write and receive letters. Once you have been at New Haven for two weeks and
are no longer on Safety, you will start having a weekly phone call with your parents.

2. HOW LONG WILL I BE HERE?
You will be here until you successfully transition on Interdependence Phase.

3. WHO CREATES MY MASTER TREATMENT PLAN?
The Treatment Team. You and your family will review and sign it.

4. WHO IS INVITED TO FAMILY WEEKEND?
Normally on your first Family Weekend, just your parents/guardians attend with you. After that, it is up to
you, your family, and Therapist as to whether other family members will attend or not. There is a designated
Sibling Family Weekend once per year.

5. WHEN CAN I GO ON A DAY PASS WITH MY FAMILY?
You must be on Exploration Phase to go on a day pass. Each pass must be approved by your Therapist, a
Nurse, Academic Advisor, and the Residential Director. You must plan passes well in advance.

6. WHAT IF I NEED CLOTHES OR OTHER PERSONAL ITEMS?
You have a trust account set up to purchase items such as clothes, hygiene items, haircuts, etc. You will
need to obtain and complete an Off Campus Pass Form to obtain funds to purchase these items or other
things you may need while at New Haven. The form must be filled out completely and turned in at least
three days before you actually need the money. You will need to arrange with your Relational Coach a time
for them to take you on the pass. New Haven supplies basic hygiene items.

7. WHEN CAN I CALL MY FRIENDS?
This privilege begins on Insight Phase. You will be allowed to talk to one approved friend for 10 minutes each
week. On Integrity Phase you will be allowed three, 15 minute calls to approved friends.

8. DO WE EVER GET ROOM CHANGES?
The Residential Director will direct room changes about every 6-8 weeks.

9. WHEN CAN I MOVE OFF OF SAFETY PHASE?
As soon as you complete all the tasks for Expectation Phase you are eligible to move off Safety. This
includes showing that you are safe to yourself and others. You will do this through your actions as well as
by signing the Safety Contract. When your Therapist and the Residential Director each feel that you are
committed to being safe, they will sign your Safety Contract as well. Once you have all three signatures you
will advance to Expectation Phase.

10. WHEN WILL I HAVE MY FIRST THERAPY SESSION?
Your Therapist will meet with you within your first five days after admission.



                                                                                                                 27
