Residential Care | Boys Town

Opens in a new window

Opens an external website

Opens an external website in a new window

Close this consent banner

This website utilizes technologies such as cookies to enable essential site functionality, as well as for analytics, personalization, and targeted advertising. 
To learn more, view the following link: 

Privacy Policy

Storage Preferences 

Skip to main content

Boys Town

BOYS TOWN HOSPITAL

SUCCESSFUL FUTURES

LIFT WITH BOYS TOWN

PARENTING.ORG

BOYS TOWN RESEARCH

YOUR LIFE YOUR VOICE

Saving Children

About

Success Stories

How to Help

Donate Now

833-294-8583

Give Monthly

Residential Care

Family Home Program

Research and Evaluation

Residential Treatment Center

FAQ

Family Home Program

Family Home Program

Research and Evaluation

Residential Treatment Center

FAQ

Child and Family Services

Residential Care

Think our

Family Home Program

could benefit your child?

Call 800-989-0000 today to speak to one our Admissions specialists.

Apply: Family Home Program

Apply: Residential Treatment

A Place for

Second Chances

Located on 640 acres in Omaha, Nebraska, the Village is one of the largest residential care communities in the country. Since 1917, boys and girls have been coming to Boys Town to benefit from compassionate, life-changing care that helps them make positive changes in their behavior and their outlook for the future.

Boys Town takes a leadership role in advocating for change and reform in the current youth and family-care system, and in applied research that can produce improved practices and outcomes for children. 

Learn More About the Family Home Program

Read Video Transcript

Woman: Healthy, happy children are our future. Our founder, Father Edward J. Flanagan, believed in that idea with all his heart. So much so, that he devoted his life to building a home where boys and girls could find love, safety, and the keys to a successful life. That home is Boys Town.

Boys Town is one of the largest and most comprehensive residential programs in the world. Located on the west edge of Omaha, Nebraska, the village of Boys Town is a community with nearly 60 homes. Tree lined streets and a large, beautiful lake give the picturesque village a warm, small-town feel.

Children flourish here because they're safe and are part of the family and community whose sole purpose is to help them get better.

Six to eight boys or girls live in each of our single family homes with a married couple called family teachers and a full-time assistant family teacher. Providing 24 hour supervision and care is their job and responsibility. Family teachers also work with parents, teachers, therapists, social agencies, doctors, and others who are involved in the child's care. This allows them to give each child individualized attention to meet his or her unique needs.

DeAngelo: My family teachers are not my family teachers, they're my family because they see me grow in a lot of ways that I didn't see myself growing. They helped me blossom because I knew I had it in me, but I didn't have that push like they give me. They helped me work towards every goal I had, they advocated for me, they did everything in their power to make me the person I am today.

Woman: The Boys Town model provides troubled and at-risk girls and boys with structure and consistency. Our model is geared to help kids replace negative learned behaviors with new positive behaviors. Our research shows that this teaching approach helps kids grow and move on to become better people, family members, students, and citizens.

We give them the foundation they need to move forward in their lives and build a healthier, more productive future. During their stay, children learn social and independent living skills, attend school, and participate in extracurricular activities including sports, intramurals, JROTC, drama, band, choir, and others. They also are responsible for chores and participate in activities as members of their Boys Town family.

Boys Town makes every effort for children in our programs to stay connected with their parents and encourage family participation in the care and services provided. Also, visits to campus by family members are encouraged and individualized based on each family's need. The ultimate goal is to reunify children with their families whenever possible.

On the outside, Boys Town schools look like any other U.S. school, but it's what happens inside that is different and life-changing for our students. Our schools provide the extra help and structure that these kids need to succeed.

Boys Town not only offers individual help for those who are behind in academics, but also has advanced placement courses for students who are preparing to go to college.

We have a regular classroom setting that includes differentiated instructional techniques used by Boys Town teachers to individually meet the needs of all students, a full-day school schedule with regular and special education classes, a fully accredited high school, grade school, and middle school with fully certified teachers, nearly 80% of high school teachers certified in special education, an open campus where kids walk to and from their homes to school and extracurricular activities, a full academic curriculum, summer school classes, small classrooms of 10 to 12 students, individual mentoring, and a specialized reading program. There's also post-graduation planning and a high school graduation rate of more than 90%.

Another key characteristic that makes our schools unique and effective is the consistent set of expectations that family teachers and school teachers have for kids. At Boys Town, we are not just caretakers, instead we are life changers. Over the years, Boys Town has helped tens of thousands of children make positive changes in their lives, changes that are real and measurable.

Mark: Placing that trust in Boys Town was the right decision for us. And to this day, we would look back and are grateful and thankful that we made that decision.

Kim: They were just such a wonderful, wonderful resource. We felt like, I wanna say a lifesaver, if that makes sense, for our family anyway. That they...just a lifesaver.

Woman: Saving children and healing families is what Boys Town is all about. It's a special place where real kids get real help, where broken lives and families are mended, and where miracles, big and small, happen every day.

Is your son or daughter struggling with issues at home or in school? Are you out of answers about what you can do? Well, you're not alone. Thousands of parents have turned to Boys Town for help, healing, and hope.

For more information about Boys Town's residential care program and how your child could benefit from our research-proven, life-changing care, contact our Boys Town admissions office at 1-800-989-0000 or email us at 
admissions@boystown.org
.

Our Program

For over a century, Boys Town has been changing the lives of troubled youth by replacing negative behavior with self-assurance, and academic and social skills to succeed in life.

For troubled youth and parents seeking life-changing help, Boys Town is unlike any other place in the country. Experience all that the Village has to offer your family and hear from others whose family life has been forever changed for the better by our program.

Student Experience

Family-Teachers

Apply for Family Home Program

Youth Safety

Research and Evaluation

Our research shows that the Boys Town Family Home Program gives children their best chance to build bright, productive futures. Years after completing services, Boys Town youth – even those with the most severe problems – achieve success as adults. Our research shows that these kids grow into adults who are nearly identical to the general population in key success factors such as positive mental health, life satisfaction, employment and family relationships.

Learn More

Residential Treatment Center

For families struggling with a troubled child or teenager who is experiencing severe behavior or mental health problems, or families that have experienced unsuccessful results with mental health providers in the past, Boys Town is here to help.

Our Residential Treatment Center (RTC) at the Boys Town National Research Hospital provides treatment that is secure, safe and medically directed for children ages 5-17 with behavioral problems. Call 531-355-5210 to speak with a representative today.

Learn More

Apply: Residential Treatment

FAQs

What is the admissions process?

The admissions process begins when a parent or legal guardian makes a referral by completing and submitting an application. Along with an application, we will need supporting clinical documentation from a provider or evaluation, an IQ assessment, a social history, necessary legal documentation, medical records, school transcripts and Special Education documents.

After reviewing the submitted information, we will determine if the child needs to participate in an interview with an Admissions Representative. This interview is conducted either in person, by phone or WebEx depending on your location.

If we determine our program is a good fit for your child and we qualify them for placement, the parent or guardian must complete some additional documentation. Boys Town sends the required forms to the parent or guardian upon the child’s qualification for placement.

Once the final admission’s requirements have been met, the parent or guardian will be contacted to schedule an admission date for the child’s arrival at Boys Town.

What is Boys Town?

Boys Town is located in Omaha, Nebraska and is one of the largest child and family care organizations in the United States. We have been serving children and families since 1917. Our programs help girls and boys who are placed outside their homes, work with families in their own homes and provide resources and support to children and parents in their communities.

What is the Family Home Program?

The Family Home Program provides family-style care for children in a home run by a professionally trained married couple called Family-Teachers. Six to eight youth of the same gender live in each Family Home. Family-Teachers are responsible for meeting the daily needs of their youth and teaching them social, academic and independent-living skills while living in a family-style environment. Family-Teachers receive 24/7 support from a Consultant.

What is a Family Home like?

A Family Home can accommodate six to eight children. It is a single-family home with a large kitchen, laundry room, living room, dining room, recreational space, bedrooms and bathrooms. Your child may share a bedroom with a roommate. They will have private space in the bedroom that can be decorated and personalized.

What does a "typical" day look like?

Your child will attend school, participate in school-based activities, eat meals with the Family-Teachers and other youth and complete chores and homework. Family-Teachers will monitor youth behaviors, all while consistently teaching new skills. Also, weekends are structured but every Family Home makes a point to participate in activities together, spend time being active and enjoy recreation time. All the kids who come to Boys Town will be able to attend religious services.

How do I know my child will be safe?

The safety of your child is our number one priority. Boys Town has numerous practices in place to monitor and ensure the safety of all youth; in fact, we even have our own police department. Every child in our care is encouraged to talk to a trusted adult at Boys Town anytime they feel unsafe, and we have an ethics line they can call if they feel they can’t get their needs met. We also encourage you, as a parent, to talk to Boys Town staff anytime you have a concern.

What is my role as a parent?

As a parent, you know your child best, and your involvement is critical. You will be working with your child’s Family-Teachers as part of a team to help support your child’s Service Plan. This plan lays out the best course of action to help your child and provides the consistency that is vital to their success. We encourage you to participate in activities that involve your child, including team meetings, daily behavior goals, extracurricular activities, school events and others.

How do I get started?

To get a referral started you will need to submit the following information:

Clinical assessment or evaluation, an IQ assessment and a social history. These often can be obtained from the child’s school or a therapist.

School grades, transcripts, behavioral information, Special Education records and Individual Education Programs.

Current (within the last year) physical examination and immunization records.

Where can I get an application?

You can 
download a Family Home Program application here
. We can also send you this application through email, mail or fax. Please call 
1-800-989-0000
to get an application sent to you today.

How long does the admissions process take?

Once the Admissions Department has received the admission forms, along with all necessary documents, an Admission Service Representative will be assigned to you. The Admission Service Representative assigned to you will review your child's information and determine if the needs of the child can best be served in our program. 

If my child is accepted, how will they get to Boys Town on the day of admission?

The legal guardian is responsible for providing transportation to Boys Town for the admission.

What will happen on admission day?

On the day your child is admitted to Boys Town, you and your child will meet together with Boys Town staff and others. This will give you an opportunity to meet the Family-Teachers your child will be living with. The members of the team that will be caring for your child will discuss you and your child’s strengths, as well as the reasons for placement at Boys Town. We value your input in setting goals for both your child and family while at Boys Town. Your input is important! We want you to feel comfortable sharing information so the Family-Teachers can get to know your child and your family. These meetings typically last 1 ½ to 2 hours.

How much does your program cost?

To determine financial responsibility, please submit a completed 
Family Home Program application
. If your child is qualified for placement, we will then have you talk with our financial department to negotiate a monthly rate based on your financial situation. 

The finance office will review copies of your W2s, paystubs, and the financial worksheet that you will submit with the application. This is to help determine a fair rate for the program. Medical insurance does not cover the cost of room and board. 

Boys Town Linebacker Turns Second Chance into Scholarship

Boys Town linebacker Darien Whitaker is headed to Kansas State. Boys Town senior Darien Whitaker moved from Baltimore, Maryland, to Nebraska entering his freshman year. 

Learn More

Boys Town Boosters Host Tailgate

On Friday, September 20, Boys Town Boosters hosted a tailgate meal at a Cowboys’ home football game and presented a check benefiting the Boys Town sports program at halftime.

Learn More

Boys Town Senior Finding Success and Helping Lead Others

With the help and support of the Successful Futures program, Robson has a job and a place to live all lined up. 

Watch His Story

Talking to Your Child

About Entering

Residential Care

Regardless of the circumstances, the difficult question remains: 
How do you start this conversation with your child?

We put together this free tool to help you do just that. 

Request the eBook

Subscribe Now

14100 Crawford Street

Boys Town, NE 68010

800-217-3700

Who We Are

Our History

Visit the Village

Locations

Our Blog

Success Stories

Find Help for Your Family

Key Initiatives

Get Involved

Ways to Give

Media Room

Careers

Boys Town Gift Shop

Gift & Estate Planning

Contact Us

Privacy Center

Notice of Non-Discrimination

Donor Policies

Financial Conflict of Interest

Charity Accreditations

© 2026 Boys Town

Father Flanagan's Boys' Home (dba as Boys Town is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit recognized by the IRS, and all donations to Boys Town are tax deductible in accordance with IRS regulations. Boys Town follows a policy of non-discrimination in accordance with the law.